Practical Vedanta and other lectures
Practical Vedanta: Part I
Practical Vedanta: Part II
Practical Vedanta: Part III
Practical Vedanta: Part IV
The Way To The Realisation Of A Universal Religion
The Ideal Of A Universal Religion
The Open Secret
The Way To Blessedness
Yajnavalkya And Maitreyi
Soul, Nature, And God
Cosmology
A Study Of The Sankhya Philosophy
Sankhya And Vedanta
The Goal

Practical Vedanta: Part I
(Delivered in London, 10th November 1896)
I have been asked to say something about the practical position of the
Vedanta philosophy. As I have told you, theory is very good indeed, but how
are we to carry it into practice? If it be absolutely impracticable, no theory is
of any value whatever, except as intellectual gymnastics. The Vedanta,
therefore, as a religion must be intensely practical. We must be able to carry it
out in every part of our lives. And not only this, the fictitious differentiation
between religion and the life of the world must vanish, for the Vedanta teaches
oneness — one life throughout. The ideals of religion must cover the whole
field of life, they must enter into all our thoughts, and more and more into
practice. I will enter gradually on the practical side as we proceed. But this
series of lectures is intended to be a basis, and so we must first apply ourselves
to theories and understand how they are worked out, proceeding from forest
caves to busy streets and cities; and one peculiar feature we find is that many of
these thoughts have been the outcome, not of retirement into forests, but have
emanated from persons whom we expect to lead the busiest lives — from
ruling monarchs.
Shvetaketu was the son of Âruni, a sage, most probably a recluse. He was
brought up in the forest, but he went to the city of the Panchâlas and appeared at
the court of the king, Pravâhana Jaivali. The king asked him, “Do you know
how beings depart hence at death?” “No, sir.” “Do you know how they return
hither?” “No, sir.” “Do you know the way of the fathers and the way of the
gods?” “No, sir.” Then the king asked other questions. Shvetaketu could not
answer them. So the king told him that he knew nothing. The boy went back to
his father, and the father admitted that he himself could not answer these
questions. It was not that he was unwilling to answer these questions. It was not
that he was unwilling to teach the boy, but he did not know these things. So he
went to the king and asked to be taught these secrets. The king said that these
things had been hitherto known only among kings; the priests never knew
them. He, however, proceeded to teach him what he desired to know. In various
Upanishads we find that this Vedanta philosophy is not the outcome of
meditation in the forests only, but that the very best parts of it were thought out
and expressed by brains which were busiest in the everyday affairs of life. We
cannot conceive any man busier than an absolute monarch, a man who is ruling

over millions of people, and yet, some of these rulers were deep thinkers.
Everything goes to show that this philosophy must be very practical; and
later on, when we come to the Bhagavad-Gita — most of you, perhaps, have
read it, it is the best commentary we have on the Vedanta philosophy —
curiously enough the scene is laid on the battlefield, where Krishna teaches this
philosophy to Arjuna; and the doctrine which stands out luminously in every
page of the Gita is intense activity, but in the midst of it, eternal calmness. This
is the secret of work, to attain which is the goal of the Vedanta. Inactivity, as we
understand it in the sense of passivity, certainly cannot be the goal. Were it so,
then the walls around us would be the most intelligent; they are inactive. Clods
of earth, stumps of trees, would be the greatest sages in the world; they are
inactive. Nor does inactivity become activity when it is combined with passion.
Real activity, which is the goal of Vedanta, is combined with eternal calmness,
the calmness which cannot be ruffled, the balance of mind which is never
disturbed, whatever happens. And we all know from our experience in life that
that is the best attitude for work.
I have been asked many times how we can work if we do not have the
passion which we generally feel for work. I also thought in that way years ago,
but as I am growing older, getting more experience, I find it is not true. The
less passion there is, the better we work. The calmer we are, the better for us,
and the more the amount of work we can do. When we let loose our feelings,
we waste so much energy, shatter our nerves, disturb our minds, and
accomplish very little work. The energy which ought to have gone out as work
is spent as mere feeling, which counts for nothing. It is only when the mind is
very calm and collected that the whole of its energy is spent in doing good
work. And if you read the lives of the great workers which the world has
produced, you will find that they were wonderfully calm men. Nothing, as it
were, could throw them off their balance. That is why the man who becomes
angry never does a great amount of work, and the man whom nothing can
make angry accomplishes so much. The man who gives way to anger, or
hatred, or any other passion, cannot work; he only breaks himself to pieces,
and does nothing practical. It is the calm, forgiving, equable, well-balanced
mind that does the greatest amount of work.
The Vedanta preaches the ideal; and the ideal, as we know, is always far
ahead of the real, of the practical, as we may call it. There are two tendencies in
human nature: one to harmonise the ideal with the life, and the other to elevate
the life to the ideal. It is a great thing to understand this, for the former

tendency is the temptation of our lives. I think that I can only do a certain class
of work. Most of it, perhaps, is bad; most of it, perhaps, has a motive power of
passion behind it, anger, or greed, or selfishness. Now if any man comes to
preach to me a certain ideal, the first step towards which is to give up
selfishness, to give up self-enjoyment, I think that is impractical. But when a
man brings an ideal which can be reconciled with my selfishness, I am glad at
once and jump at it. That is the ideal for me. As the word “orthodox” has been
manipulated into various forms, so has been the word “practical”. “My doxy is
orthodoxy; your doxy is heterodoxy.” So with practicality. What I think is
practical, is to me the only practicality in the world. If I am a shopkeeper, I
think shopkeeping the only practical pursuit in the world. If I am a thief, I think
stealing is the best means of being practical; others are not practical. You see
how we all use this word practical for things we like and can do. Therefore I
will ask you to understand that Vedanta, though it is intensely practical, is
always so in the sense of the ideal. It does not preach an impossible ideal,
however high it be, and it is high enough for an ideal. In one word, this ideal is
that you are divine, “Thou art That”. This is the essence of Vedanta; after all its
ramifications and intellectual gymnastics, you know the human soul to be pure
and omniscient, you see that such superstitions as birth and death would be
entire nonsense when spoken of in connection with the soul. The soul was
never born and will never die, and all these ideas that we are going to die and
are afraid to die are mere superstitions. And all such ideas as that we can do
this or cannot do that are superstitions. We can do everything. The Vedanta
teaches men to have faith in themselves first. As certain religions of the world
say that a man who does not believe in a Personal God outside of himself is an
atheist, so the Vedanta says, a man who does not believe in himself is an atheist.
Not believing in the glory of our own soul is what the Vedanta calls atheism.
To many this is, no doubt, a terrible idea; and most of us think that this ideal
can never be reached; but the Vedanta insists that it can be realised by every
one. There is neither man nor woman or child, nor difference of race or sex,
nor anything that stands as a bar to the realisation of the ideal, because Vedanta
shows that it is realised already, it is already there.
All the powers in the universe are already ours. It is we who have put our
hands before our eyes and cry that it is dark. Know that there is no darkness
around us. Take the hands away and there is the light which was from the
beginning. Darkness never existed, weakness never existed. We who are fools
cry that we are weak; we who are fools cry that we are impure. Thus Vedanta

not only insists that the ideal is practical, but that it has been so all the time; and
this Ideal, this Reality, is our own nature. Everything else that you see is false,
untrue. As soon as you say, “I am a little mortal being,” you are saying
something which is not true, you are giving the lie to yourselves, you are
hypnotising yourselves into something vile and weak and wretched.
The Vedanta recognises no sin, it only recognises error. And the greatest
error, says the Vedanta, is to say that you are weak, that you are a sinner, a
miserable creature, and that you have no power and you cannot do this and that.
Every time you think in that way, you, as it were, rivet one more link in the
chain that binds you down, you add one more layer of hypnotism on to your
own soul. Therefore, whosoever thinks he is weak is wrong, whosoever thinks
he is impure is wrong, and is throwing a bad thought into the world. This we
must always bear in mind that in the Vedanta there is no attempt at reconciling
the present life — the hypnotised life, this false life which we have assumed —
with the ideal; but this false life must go, and the real life which is always
existing must manifest itself, must shine out. No man becomes purer and purer,
it is a matter of greater manifestation. The veil drops away, and the native
purity of the soul begins to manifest itself. Everything is ours already —
infinite purity, freedom, love, and power.
The Vedanta also says that not only can this be realised in the depths of
forests or caves, but by men in all possible conditions of life. We have seen that
the people who discovered these truths were neither living in caves nor forests,
nor following the ordinary vocations of life, but men who, we have every
reason to believe, led the busiest of lives, men who had to command armies, to
sit on thrones, and look to the welfare of millions — and all these, in the days
of absolute monarchy, and not as in these days when a king is to a great extent
a mere figurehead. Yet they could find time to think out all these thoughts, to
realise them, and to teach them to humanity. How much more then should it be
practical for us whose lives, compared with theirs, are lives of leisure? That
we cannot realise them is a shame to us, seeing that we are comparatively free
all the time, having very little to do. My requirements are as nothing compared
with those of an ancient absolute monarch. My wants are as nothing compared
with the demands of Arjuna on the battlefield of Kurukshetra, commanding a
huge army; and yet he could find time in the midst of the din and turmoil of
battle to talk the highest philosophy and to carry it into his life also. Surely we
ought to be able to do as much in this life of ours — comparatively free, easy,
and comfortable. Most of us here have more time than we think we have, if we

really want to use it for good. With the amount of freedom we have we can
attain to two hundred ideals in this life, if we will, but we must not degrade the
ideal to the actual. One of the most insinuating things comes to us in the shape
of persons who apologise for our mistakes and teach us how to make special
excuses for all our foolish wants and foolish desires; and we think that their
ideal is the only ideal we need have. But it is not so. The Vedanta teaches no
such thing. The actual should be reconciled to the ideal, the present life should
be made to coincide with life eternal.
For you must always remember that the one central ideal of Vedanta is this
oneness. There are no two in anything, no two lives, nor even two different
kinds of life for the two worlds. You will find the Vedas speaking of heavens
and things like that at first; but later on, when they come to the highest ideals of
their philosophy, they brush away all these things. There is but one life, one
world, one existence. Everything is that One, the difference is in degree and not
in kind. The difference between our lives is not in kind. The Vedanta entirely
denies such ideas as that animals are separate from men, and that they were
made and created by God to be used for our food.
Some people have been kind enough to start an antivivisection society. I
asked a member, “Why do you think, my friend, that it is quite lawful to kill
animals for food, and not to kill one or two for scientific experiments?” He
replied, “Vivisection is most horrible, but animals have been given to us for
food.” Oneness includes all animals. If man’s life is immortal, so also is the
animal’s. The difference is only in degree and not in kind. The amoeba and I
are the same, the difference is only in degree; and from the standpoint of the
highest life, all these differences vanish. A man may see a great deal of
difference between grass and a little tree, but if you mount very high, the grass
and the biggest tree will appear much the same. So, from the standpoint of the
highest ideal, the lowest animal and the highest man are the same. If you
believe there is a God, the animals and the highest creatures must be the same.
A God who is partial to his children called men, and cruel to his children
called brute beasts, is worse than a demon. I would rather die a hundred times
than worship such a God. My whole life would be a fight with such a God But
there is no difference, and those who say there is, are irresponsible, heartless
people who do not know. Here is a case of the word practical used in a wrong
sense. I myself may not be a very strict vegetarian, but I understand the ideal.
When I eat meat I know it is wrong. Even if I am bound to eat it under certain
circumstances, I know it is cruel. I must not drag my ideal down to the actual

and apologise for my weak conduct in this way. The ideal is not to eat flesh,
not to injure any being, for all animals are my brothers. If you can think of
them as your brothers, you have made a little headway towards the
brotherhood of all souls, not to speak of the brotherhood of man! That is
child’s play. You generally find that this is not very acceptable to many,
because it teaches them to give up the actual, and go higher up to the ideal. But
if you bring out a theory which is reconciled with their present conduct, they
regard it as entirely practical.
There is this strongly conservative tendency in human nature: we do not like
to move one step forward. I think of mankind just as I read of persons who
become frozen in snow; all such, they say, want to go to sleep, and if you try to
drag them up, they say, “Let me sleep; it is so beautiful to sleep in the snow”,
and they die there in that sleep. So is our nature. That is what we are doing all
our life, getting frozen from the feet upwards, and yet wanting to sleep.
Therefore you must struggle towards the ideal, and if a man comes who wants
to bring that ideal down to your level, and teach a religion that does not carry
that highest ideal, do not listen to him. To me that is an impracticable religion.
But if a man teaches a religion which presents the highest ideal, I am ready for
him. Beware when anyone is trying to apologise for sense vanities and sense
weaknesses. If anyone wants to preach that way to us, poor, sense-bound clods
of earth as we have made ourselves by following that teaching, we shall never
progress. I have seen many of these things, have had some experience of the
world, and my country is the land where religious sects grow like mushrooms.
Every year new sects arise. But one thing I have marked, that it is only those
that never want to reconcile the man of flesh with the man of truth that make
progress. Wherever there is this false idea of reconciling fleshly vanities with
the highest ideals, of dragging down God to the level of man, there comes
decay. Man should not be degraded to worldly slavery, but should be raised up
to God.
At the same time, there is another side to the question. We must not look
down with contempt on others. All of us are going towards the same goal. The
difference between weakness and strength is one of degree; the difference
between virtue and vice is one of degree, the difference between heaven and
hell is one of degree, the difference between life and death is one of degree, all
differences in this world are of degree, and not of kind, because oneness is the
secret of everything. All is One, which manifests Itself, either as thought, or
life, or soul, or body, and the difference is only in degree. As such, we have no

right to look down with contempt upon those who are not developed exactly in
the same degree as we are. Condemn none; if you can stretch out a helping
hand, do so. If you cannot, fold your hands, bless your brothers, and let them
go their own way. Dragging down and condemning is not the way to work.
Never is work accomplished in that way. We spend our energies in
condemning others. Criticism and condemnation is a vain way of spending our
energies, for in the long run we come to learn that all are seeing the same
thing, are more or less approaching the same ideal, and that most of our
differences are merely differences of expression.
Take the idea of sin. I was telling you just now the Vedantic idea of it, and
the other idea is that man is a sinner. They are practically the same, only the
one takes the positive and the other the negative side. One shows to man his
strength and the other his weakness. There may be weakness, says the Vedanta,
but never mind, we want to grow. Disease was found out as soon as man was
born. Everyone knows his disease; it requires no one to tell us what our
diseases are. But thinking all the time that we are diseased will not cure us —
medicine is necessary. We may forget anything outside, we may try to become
hypocrites to the external world, but in our heart of hearts we all know our
weaknesses. But, says the Vedanta, being reminded of weakness does not help
much; give strength, and strength does not come by thinking of weakness all
the time. The remedy for weakness is not brooding over weakness, but
thinking of strength. Teach men of the strength that is already within them.
Instead of telling them they are sinners, the Vedanta takes the opposite position,
and says, “You are pure and perfect, and what you call sin does not belong to
you.” Sins are very low degrees of Self-manifestation; manifest your Self in a
high degree. That is the one thing to remember; all of us can do that. Never say,
“No”, never say, “I cannot”, for you are infinite. Even time and space are as
nothing compared with your nature. You can do anything and everything, you
are almighty.
These are the principles of ethics, but we shall now come down lower and
work out the details. We shall see how this Vedanta can be carried into our
everyday life, the city life, the country life, the national life, and the home life
of every nation. For, if a religion cannot help man wherever he may be,
wherever he stands, it is not of much use; it will remain only a theory for the
chosen few. Religion, to help mankind, must be ready and able to help him in
whatever condition he is, in servitude or in freedom, in the depths of
degradation or on the heights of purity; everywhere, equally, it should be able

to come to his aid. The principles of Vedanta, or the ideal of religion, or
whatever you may call it, will be fulfilled by its capacity for performing this
great function.
The ideal of faith in ourselves is of the greatest help to us. If faith in
ourselves had been more extensively taught and practiced, I am sure a very
large portion of the evils and miseries that we have would have vanished.
Throughout the history of mankind, if any motive power has been more potent
than another in the lives of all great men and women, it is that of faith in
themselves. Born with the consciousness that they were to be great, they
became great. Let a man go down as low as possible; there must come a time
when out of sheer desperation he will take an upward curve and will learn to
have faith in himself. But it is better for us that we should know it from the
very first. Why should we have all these bitter experiences in order to gain
faith in ourselves? We can see that all the difference between man and man is
owing to the existence or non-existence of faith in himself. Faith in ourselves
will do everything. I have experienced it in my own life, and am still doing so;
and as I grow older that faith is becoming stronger and stronger. He is an
atheist who does not believe in himself. The old religions said that he was an
atheist who did not believe in God. The new religion says that he is the atheist
who does not believe in himself. But it is not selfish faith because the Vedanta,
again, is the doctrine of oneness. It means faith in all, because you are all. Love
for yourselves means love for all, love for animals, love for everything, for
you are all one. It is the great faith which will make the world better. I am sure
of that. He is the highest man who can say with truth, “I know all about myself.”
Do you know how much energy, how many powers, how many forces are still
lurking behind that frame of yours? What scientist has known all that is in
man? Millions of years have passed since man first came here, and yet but one
infinitesimal part of his powers has been manifested. Therefore, you must not
say that you are weak. How do you know what possibilities lie behind that
degradation on the surface? You know but little of that which is within you. For
behind you is the ocean of infinite power and blessedness.
“This Âtman is first to be heard of.” Hear day and night that you are that
Soul. Repeat it to yourselves day and night till it enters into your very veins, till
it tingles in every drop of blood, till it is in your flesh and bone. Let the whole
body be full of that one ideal, “I am the birthless, the deathless, the blissful, the
omniscient, the omnipotent, ever-glorious Soul.” Think on it day and night;
think on it till it becomes part and parcel of your life. Meditate upon it, and out

of that will come work. “Out of the fullness of the heart the mouth speaketh,”
and out of the fullness of the heart the hand worketh also. Action will come.
Fill yourselves with the ideal; whatever you do, think well on it. All your
actions will be magnified, transformed, deified, by the very power of the
thought. If matter is powerful, thought is omnipotent. Bring this thought to bear
upon your life, fill yourselves with the thought of your almightiness, your
majesty, and your glory. Would to God no superstitions had been put into your
head! Would to God we had not been surrounded from our birth by all these
superstitious influences and paralysing ideas of our weakness and vileness!
Would to God that mankind had had an easier path through which to attain to
the noblest and highest truths! But man had to pass through all this; do not
make the path more difficult for those who are coming after you.
These are sometimes terrible doctrines to teach. I know people who get
frightened at these ideas, but for those who want to be practical, this is the first
thing to learn. Never tell yourselves or others that you are weak. Do good if
you can, but do not injure the world. You know in your inmost heart that many
of your limited ideas, this humbling of yourself and praying and weeping to
imaginary beings are superstitions. Tell me one case where these prayers have
been answered. All the answers that came were from your own hearts. You
know there are no ghosts, but no sooner are you in the dark than you feel a
little creepy sensation. That is so because in our childhood we have had all
these fearful ideas put into our heads. But do not teach these things to others
through fear of society and public opinion, through fear of incurring the
hatred of friends, or for fear of losing cherished superstitions. Be masters of
all these. What is there to be taught more in religion than the oneness of the
universe and faith in one’s self? All the works of mankind for thousands of
years past have been towards this one goal, and mankind is yet working it out.
It is your turn now and you already know the truth. For it has been taught on all
sides. Not only philosophy and psychology, but materialistic sciences have
declared it. Where is the scientific man today who fears to acknowledge the
truth of this oneness of the universe? Who is there who dares talk of many
worlds? All these are superstitions. There is only one life and one world, and
this one life and one world is appearing to us as manifold. This manifoldness
is like a dream. When you dream, one dream passes away and another comes.
You do not live in your dreams. The dreams come one after another, scene
after scene unfolds before you. So it is in this world of ninety per cent misery
and ten per cent happiness. Perhaps after a while it will appear as ninety per

cent happiness, and we shall call it heaven, but a time comes to the sage when
the whole thing vanishes, and this world appears as God Himself, and his own
soul as God. It is not therefore that there are many worlds, it is not that there
are many lives. All this manifoldness is the manifestation of that One. That One
is manifesting Himself as many, as matter, spirit, mind, thought, and everything
else. It is that One, manifesting Himself as many. Therefore the first step for us
to take is to teach the truth to ourselves and to others.
Let the world resound with this ideal, and let superstitions vanish. Tell it to
men who are weak and persist in telling it. You are the Pure One; awake and
arise, O mighty one, this sleep does not become you. Awake and arise, it does
not befit you. Think not that you are weak and miserable. Almighty, arise and
awake, and manifest your own nature. It is not fitting that you think yourself a
sinner. It is not fitting that you think yourself weak. Say that to the world, say it
to yourselves, and see what a practical result comes, see how with an electric
flash everything is manifested, how everything is changed. Tell that to
mankind, and show them their power. Then we shall learn how to apply it in
our daily lives.
To be able to use what we call Viveka (discrimination), to learn how in
every moment of our lives, in every one of our actions, to discriminate
between what is right and wrong, true and false, we shall have to know the test
of truth, which is purity, oneness. Everything that makes for oneness is truth.
Love is truth, and hatred is false, because hatred makes for multiplicity. It is
hatred that separates man from man; therefore it is wrong and false. It is a
disintegrating power; it separates and destroys.
Love binds, love makes for that oneness. You become one, the mother with
the child, families with the city, the whole world becomes one with the animals.
For love is Existence, God Himself; and all this is the manifestation of that One
Love, more or less expressed. The difference is only in degree, but it is the
manifestation of that One Love throughout. Therefore in all our actions we
have to judge whether it is making for diversity or for oneness. If for diversity
we have to give it up, but if it makes for oneness we are sure it is good. So with
our thoughts; we have to decide whether they make for disintegration,
multiplicity, or for oneness, binding soul to soul and bringing one influence to
bear. If they do this, we will take them up, and if not, we will throw them off as
criminal.
The whole idea of ethics is that it does not depend on anything unknowable,
it does not teach anything unknown, but in the language of the Upanishad, “The

God whom you worship as an unknown God, the same I preach unto thee.” It is
through the Self that you know anything. I see the chair; but to see the chair, I
have first to perceive myself and then the chair. It is in and through the Self that
the chair is perceived. It is in and through the Self that you are known to me,
that the whole world is known to me; and therefore to say this Self is unknown
is sheer nonsense. Take off the Self and the whole universe vanishes. In and
through the Self all knowledge comes. Therefore it is the best known of all. It
is yourself, that which you call I. You may wonder how this I of me can be the I
of you. You may wonder how this limited I can be the unlimited Infinite, but it
is so. The limited is a mere fiction. The Infinite has been covered up, as it were,
and a little of It is manifesting as the I. Limitation can never come upon the
unlimited; it is a fiction. The Self is known, therefore, to every one of us —
man, woman, or child — and even to animals. Without knowing Him we can
neither live nor move, nor have our being; without knowing this Lord of all,
we cannot breathe or live a second. The God of the Vedanta is the most known
of all and is not the outcome of imagination.
If this is not preaching a practical God, how else could you teach a practical
God? Where is there a more practical God than He whom I see before me — a
God omnipresent, in every being, more real than our senses? For you are He,
the Omnipresent God Almighty, the Soul of your souls, and if I say you are
not, I tell an untruth. I know it, whether at all times I realise it or not. He is the
Oneness, the Unity of all, the Reality of all life and all existence.
These ideas of the ethics of Vedanta have to be worked out in detail, and,
therefore, you must have patience. As I have told you, we want to take the
subject in detail and work it up thoroughly, to see how the ideas grow from
very low ideals, and how the one great Ideal of oneness has developed and
become shaped into the universal love; and we ought to study these in order to
avoid dangers. The world cannot find time to work it up from the lowest steps.
But what is the use of our standing on higher steps if we cannot give the truth
to others coming afterwards? Therefore, it is better to study it in all its
workings; and first, it is absolutely necessary to clear the intellectual portion,
although we know that intellectuality is almost nothing; for it is the heart that is
of most importance. It is through the heart that the Lord is seen, and not
through the intellect. The intellect is only the street-cleaner, cleansing the path
for us, a secondary worker, the policeman; but the policeman is not a positive
necessity for the workings of society. He is only to stop disturbances, to check
wrong-doing, and that is all the work required of the intellect. When you read

intellectual books, you think when you have mastered them, “Bless the Lord
that I am out of them”, because the intellect is blind and cannot move of itself,
it has neither hands nor feet. It is feeling that works, that moves with speed
infinitely superior to that of electricity or anything else. Do you feel? — that is
the question. If you do, you will see the Lord: It is the feeling that you have
today that will be intensified, deified, raised to the highest platform, until it
feels everything, the oneness in everything, till it feels God in itself and in
others. The intellect can never do that. “Different methods of speaking words,
different methods of explaining the texts of books, these are for the enjoyment
of the learned, not for the salvation of the soul” (Vivekachudâmani, 58).
Those of you who have read Thomas a Kempis know how in every page he
insists on this, and almost every holy man in the world has insisted on it.
Intellect is necessary, for without it we fall into crude errors and make all sorts
of mistakes. Intellect checks these; but beyond that, do not try to build anything
upon it. It is an inactive, secondary help; the real help is feeling, love. Do you
feel for others? If you do, you are growing in oneness. If you do not feel for
others, you may be the most intellectual giant ever born, but you will be
nothing; you are but dry intellect, and you will remain so. And if you feel, even
if you cannot read any book and do not know any language, you are in the
right way. The Lord is yours.
Do you not know from the history of the world where the power of the
prophets lay? Where was it? In the intellect? Did any of them write a fine book
on philosophy, on the most intricate ratiocinations of logic? Not one of them.
They only spoke a few words. Feel like Christ and you will be a Christ; feel
like Buddha and you will be a Buddha. It is feeling that is the life, the strength,
the vitality, without which no amount of intellectual activity can reach God.
Intellect is like limbs without the power of locomotion. It is only when feeling
enters and gives them motion that they move and work on others. That is so all
over the world, and it is a thing which you must always remember. It is one of
the most practical things in Vedantic morality, for it is the teaching of the
Vedanta that you are all prophets, and all must be prophets. The book is not the
proof of your conduct, but you are the proof of the book. How do you know
that a book teaches truth? Because you are truth and feel it. That is what the
Vedanta says. What is the proof of the Christs and Buddhas of the world? That
you and I feel like them. That is how you and I understand that they were true.
Our prophet-soul is the proof of their prophet-soul. Your godhead is the proof
of God Himself. If you are not a prophet, there never has been anything true of

God. If you are not God, there never was any God, and never will be. This,
says the Vedanta, is the ideal to follow. Every one of us will have to become a
prophet, and you are that already. Only know it. Never think there is anything
impossible for the soul. It is the greatest heresy to think so. If there is sin, this
is the only sin — to say that you are weak, or others are weak.
Practical Vedanta: Part II
(Delivered in London, 12th November 1896)
I will relate to you a very ancient story from the Chhândogya Upanishad,
which tells how knowledge came to a boy. The form of the story is very crude,
but we shall find that it contains a principle. A young boy said to his mother, “I
am going to study the Vedas. Tell me the name of my father and my caste.” The
mother was not a married woman, and in India the child of a woman who has
not been married is considered an outcast; he is not recognised by society and
is not entitled to study the Vedas. So the poor mother said, “My child, I do not
know your family name; I was in service, and served in different places; I do
not know who your father is, but my name is Jabâlâ and your name is
Satyakâma.” The little child went to a sage and asked to be taken as a student.
The sage asked him, “What is the name of your father, and what is your caste?”
The boy repeated to him what he had heard from his mother. The sage at once
said, “None but a Brâhmin could speak such a damaging truth about himself.
You are a Brahmin and I will teach you. You have not swerved from truth.” So
he kept the boy with him and educated him.
Now come some of the peculiar methods of education in ancient India. This
teacher gave Satyakama four hundred lean, weak cows to take care of, and sent
him to the forest. There he went and lived for some time. The teacher had told
him to come back when the herd would increase to the number of one
thousand. After a few years, one day Satyakama heard a big bull in the herd
saying to him, “We are a thousand now; take us back to your teacher. I will
teach you a little of Brahman.” “Say on, sir,” said Satyakama. Then the bull
said, “The East is a part of the Lord, so is the West, so is the South, so is the
North. The four cardinal points are the four parts of Brahman. Fire will also
teach you something of Brahman.” Fire was a great symbol in those days, and
every student had to procure fire and make offerings. So on the following day,
Satyakama started for his Guru’s house, and when in the evening he had
performed his oblation, and worshipped at the fire, and was sitting near it, he

heard a voice come from the fire, “O Satyakama.” “Speak, Lord,” said
Satyakama. (Perhaps you may remember a very similar story in the Old
Testament, how Samuel heard a mysterious voice.) “O Satyakama, I am come
to teach you a little of Brahman. This earth is a portion of that Brahman. The
sky and the heaven are portions of It. The ocean is a part of that Brahman.”
Then the fire said that a certain bird would also teach him something.
Satyakama continued his journey and on the next day when he had performed
his evening sacrifice a swan came to him and said, “I will teach you something
about Brahman. This fire which you worship, O Satyakama, is a part of that
Brahman. The sun is a part, the moon is a part, the lightning is a part of that
Brahman. A bird called Madgu will tell you more about it.” The next evening
that bird came, and a similar voice was heard by Satyakama, “I will tell you
something about Brahman. Breath is a part of Brahman, sight is a part, hearing
is a part, the mind is a part.” Then the boy arrived at his teacher ’s place and
presented himself before him with due reverence. No sooner had the teacher
seen this disciple than he remarked: “Satyakama, thy face shines like that of a
knower of Brahman! Who then has taught thee?” “Beings other than men,”
replied Satyakama. “But I wish that you should teach me, sir. For I have heard
from men like you that knowledge which is learnt from a Guru alone leads to
the supreme good.” Then the sage taught him the same knowledge which he
had received from the gods. “And nothing was left out, yea, nothing was left
out.”
Now, apart from the allegories of what the bull, the fire, and the birds
taught, we see the tendency of the thought and the direction in which it was
going in those days. The great idea of which we here see the germ is that all
these voices are inside ourselves. As we understand these truths better, we find
that the voice is in our own heart, and the student understood that all the time he
was hearing the truth; but his explanation was not correct. He was interpreting
the voice as coming from the external world, while all the time, it was within
him. The second idea that we get is that of making the knowledge of the
Brahman practical. The world is always seeking the practical possibilities of
religion, and we find in these stories how it was becoming more and more
practical every day. The truth was shown through everything with which the
students were familiar. The fire they were worshipping was Brahman, the earth
was a part of Brahman, and so on.
The next story belongs to Upakosala Kâmalâyana, a disciple of this
Satyakama, who went to be taught by him and dwelt with him for some time.

Now Satyakama went away on a journey, and the student became very
downhearted; and when the teacher ’s wife came and asked him why he was not
eating, the boy said, “I am too unhappy to eat.” Then a voice came from the
fire he was worshipping, saying “This life is Brahman, Brahman is the ether,
and Brahman is happiness. Know Brahman.” “I know, sir,” the boy replied,
“that life is Brahman, but that It is ether and happiness I do not know.” Then it
explained that the two words ether and happiness signified one thing in reality,
viz. the sentient ether (pure intelligence) that resides in the heart. So, it taught
him Brahman as life and as the ether in the heart. Then the fire taught him,
“This earth, food, fire, and sun whom you worship, are forms of Brahman.
The person that is seen in the sun, I am He. He who knows this and meditates on
Him, all his sins vanish and he has long life and becomes happy. He who lives
in the cardinal points, the moon, the stars, and the water, I am He. He who lives
in this life, the ether, the heavens, and the lightning, I am He.” Here too we see
the same idea of practical religion. The things which they were worshipping,
such as the fire, the sun, the moon, and so forth, and the voice with which they
were familiar, form the subject of the stories which explain them and give them
a higher meaning. And this is the real, practical side of Vedanta. It does not
destroy the world, but it explains it; it does not destroy the person, but explains
him; it does not destroy the individuality, but explains it by showing the real
individuality. It does not show that this world is vain and does not exist, but it
says, “Understand what this world is, so that it may not hurt you.” The voice
did not say to Upakosala that the fire which he was worshipping, or the sun, or
the moon, or the lightning, or anything else, was all wrong, but it showed him
that the same spirit which was inside the sun, and moon, and lightning, and the
fire, and the earth, was in him, so that everything became transformed, as it
were, in the eyes of Upakosala. The fire which was merely a material fire
before, in which to make oblations, assumed a new aspect and became the
Lord. The earth became transformed, life became transformed, the sun, the
moon, the stars, the lightning, everything became transformed and deified.
Their real nature was known. The theme of the Vedanta is to see the Lord in
everything, to see things in their real nature, not as they appear to be. Then
another lesson is taught in the Upanishads: “He who shines through the eyes is
Brahman; He is the Beautiful One, He is the Shining One. He shines in all these
worlds.” A certain peculiar light, a commentator says, which comes to the pure
man, is what is meant by the light in the eyes, and it is said that when a man is
pure such a light will shine in his eyes, and that light belongs really to the Soul

within, which is everywhere. It is the same light which shines in the planets, in
the stars, and suns.
I will now read to you some other doctrine of these ancient Upanishads,
about birth and death and so on. Perhaps it will interest you. Shvetaketu went to
the king of the Panchâlas, and the king asked him, “Do you know where people
go when they die? Do you know how they come back? Do you know why the
other world does not become full?” The boy replied that he did not know. Then
he went to his father and asked him the same questions. The father said, “I do
not know,” and he went to the king. The king said that this knowledge was
never known to the priests, it was only with the kings, and that was the reason
why kings ruled the world. This man stayed with the king for some time, for
the king said he would teach him. “The other world, O Gautama, is the fire.
The sun is its fuel. The rays are the smoke. The day is the flame. The moon is
the embers. And the stars are the sparks. In this fire the gods pour libation of
faith and from this libation king Soma is born.” So on he goes. “You need not
make oblation to that little fire: the whole world is that fire, and this oblation,
this worship, is continually going on. The gods, and the angels, and everybody
is worshipping it. Man is the greatest symbol of fire, the body of man.” Here
also we see the ideal becoming practical and Brahman is seen in everything.
The principle that underlies all these stories is that invented symbolism may be
good and helpful, but already better symbols exist than any we can invent. You
may invent an image through which to worship God, but a better image already
exists, the living man. You may build a temple in which to worship God, and
that may be good, but a better one, a much higher one, already exists, the
human body.
You remember that the Vedas have two parts, the ceremonial and the
knowledge portions. In time ceremonials had multiplied and become so
intricate that it was almost hopeless to disentangle them, and so in the
Upanishads we find that the ceremonials are almost done away with, but gently,
by explaining them. We see that in old times they had these oblations and
sacrifices, then the philosophers came, and instead of snatching away the
symbols from the hands of the ignorant, instead of taking the negative position,
which we unfortunately find so general in modern reforms, they gave them
something to take their place. “Here is the symbol of fire,” they said. “Very
good! But here is another symbol, the earth. What a grand, great symbol! Here
is this little temple, but the whole universe is a temple; a man can worship
anywhere. There are the peculiar figures that men draw on the earth, and there

are the altars, but here is the greatest of altars, the living, conscious human
body, and to worship at this altar is far higher than the worship of any dead
symbols.”
We now come to a peculiar doctrine. I do not understand much of it myself.
If you can make something out of it, I will read it to you. When a man dies,
who has by meditation purified himself and got knowledge, he first goes to
light, then from light to day, from day to the light half of the moon, from that
to the six months when the sun goes to the north, from that to the year, from the
year to the sun, from the sun to the moon, from the moon to the lightning, and
when he comes to the sphere of lightning, he meets a person who is not human,
and that person leads him to (the conditioned) Brahman. This is the way of the
gods. When sages and wise persons die, they go that way and they do not
return. What is meant by this month and year, and all these things, no one
understands clearly. Each one gives his own meaning, and some say it is all
nonsense. What is meant by going to the world of the moon and of the sun, and
this person who comes to help the soul after it has reached the sphere of
lightning, no one knows. There is an idea among the Hindus that the moon is a
place where life exists, and we shall see how life has come from there. Those
that have not attained to knowledge, but have done good work in this life, first
go, when they die, through smoke, then to night, then to the dark fifteen days,
then to the six months when the sun goes to the south, and from that they go to
the region of their forefathers, then to ether, then to the region of the moon,
and there become the food of the gods, and later, are born as gods and live
there so long as their good works will permit. And when the effect of the good
work has been finished, they come back to earth by the same route. They first
become ether, and then air, and then smoke, and then mist, then cloud, and then
fall upon the earth as raindrops; then they get into food, which is eaten up by
human beings, and finally become their children. Those whose works have
been very good take birth in good families, and those whose works have been
bad take bad births, even in animal bodies. Animals are continually coming to
and going from this earth. That is why the earth is neither full nor empty.
Several ideas we can get also from this, and later on, perhaps, we shall be
able to understand it better, and we can speculate a little upon what it means.
The last part which deals with how those who have been in heaven return, is
clearer, perhaps, than the first part; but the whole idea seems to be this that
there is no permanent heaven without realising God. Now some people who
have not realised God, but have done good work in this world, with the view of

enjoying the results, go, when they die, through this and that place, until they
reach heaven, and there they are born in the same way as we are here, as
children of the gods, and they live there as long as their good works will
permit. Out of this comes one basic idea of the Vedanta that everything which
has name and form is transient. This earth is transient, because it has name and
form, and so the heavens must be transient, because there also name and form
remain. A heaven which is eternal will be contradictory in terms, because
everything that has name and form must begin in time, exist in time, and end in
time. These are settled doctrines of the Vedanta, and as such the heavens are
given up.
We have seen in the Samhitâ that the idea of heaven was that it was eternal,
much the same as is prevalent among Mohammedans and Christians. The
Mohammedans concretise it a little more. They say it is a place where there are
gardens, beneath which rivers run. In the desert of Arabia water is very
desirable, so the Mohammedan always conceives of his heaven as containing
much water. I was born in a country where there are six months of rain every
year. I should think of heaven, I suppose, as a dry place, and so also would the
English people. These heavens in the Samhita are eternal, and the departed have
beautiful bodies and live with their forefathers, and are happy ever afterwards.
There they meet with their parents, children, and other relatives, and lead very
much the same sort of life as here, only much happier. All the difficulties and
obstructions to happiness in this life have vanished, and only its good parts and
enjoyments remain. But however comfortable mankind may consider this state
of things, truth is one thing and comfort is another. There are cases where truth
is not comfortable until we reach its climax. Human nature is very conservative
It does something, and having once done that, finds it hard to get out of it. The
mind will not receive new thoughts, because they bring discomfort.
In the Upanishads, we see a tremendous departure made. It is declared that
these heavens in which men live with the ancestors after death cannot be
permanent, seeing that everything which has name and form must die. If there
are heavens with forms, these heavens must vanish in course of time; they may
last millions of years, but there must come a time when they will have to go.
With this idea came another that these souls must come back to earth, and that
heavens are places where they enjoy the results of their good works, and after
these effects are finished they come back into this earth life again. One thing is
clear from this that mankind had a perception of the philosophy of causation
even at the early time. Later on we shall see how our philosophers bring that

out in the language of philosophy and logic, but here it is almost in the
language of children. One thing you may remark in reading these books that it
is all internal perception. If you ask me if this can be practical, my answer is, it
has been practical first, and philosophical next. You can see that first these
things have been perceived and realised and then written. This world spoke to
the early thinkers. Birds spoke to them, animals spoke to them, the sun and the
moon spoke to them; and little by little they realised things, and got into the
heart of nature. Not by cogitation not by the force of logic, not by picking the
brains of others and making a big book, as is the fashion in modern times, not
even as I do, by taking up one of their writings and making a long lecture, but
by patient investigation and discovery they found out the truth. Its essential
method was practice, and so it must be always. Religion is ever a practical
science, and there never was nor will be any theological religion. It is practice
first, and knowledge afterwards. The idea that souls come back is already there.
Those persons who do good work with the idea of a result, get it, but the result
is not permanent. There we get the idea of causation very beautifully put
forward, that the effect is only commensurate with the cause. As the cause is, so
the effect will be. The cause being finite, the effect must be finite. If the cause is
eternal the effect can be eternal, but all these causes, doing good work, and all
other things, are only finite causes, and as such cannot produce infinite result.
We now come to the other side of the question. As there cannot be an eternal
heaven, on the same grounds, there cannot be an eternal hell. Suppose I am a
very wicked man, doing evil every minute of my life. Still, my whole life here,
compared with my eternal life, is nothing. If there be an eternal punishment, it
will mean that there is an infinite effect produced by a finite cause, which
cannot be. If I do good all my life, I cannot have an infinite heaven; it would be
making the same mistake. But there is a third course which applies to those
who have known the Truth, to those who have realised It. This is the only way
to get beyond this veil of Mâyâ — to realise what Truth is; and the Upanishads
indicate what is meant by realising the Truth.
It means recognising neither good nor bad, but knowing all as coming from
the Self; Self is in everything. It means denying the universe; shutting your eyes
to it; seeing the Lord in hell as well as in heaven; seeing the Lord in death as
well as in life. This is the line of thought in the passage I have read to you; the
earth is a symbol of the Lord, the sky is the Lord, the place we fill is the Lord,
everything is Brahman. And this is to be seen, realised, not simply talked or
thought about. We can see as its logical consequence that when the soul has

realised that everything is full of the Lord, of Brahman, it will not care whether
it goes to heaven, or hell, or anywhere else; whether it be born again on this
earth or in heaven. These things have ceased to have any meaning to that soul,
because every place is the same, every place is the temple of the Lord, every
place has become holy and the presence of the Lord is all that it sees in heaven,
or hell, or anywhere else. Neither good nor bad, neither life nor death — only
the one infinite Brahman exists.
According to the Vedanta, when a man has arrived at that perception, he has
become free, and he is the only man who is fit to live in this world. Others are
not. The man who sees evil, how can he live in this world? His life is a mass of
misery. The man who sees dangers, his life is a misery; the man who sees
death, his life is a misery. That man alone can live in this world, he alone can
say, “I enjoy this life, and I am happy in this life”. who has seen the Truth, and
the Truth in everything. By the by, I may tell you that the idea of hell does not
occur in the Vedas anywhere. It comes with the Purânas much later. The worst
punishment according to the Vedas is coming back to earth, having another
chance in this world. From the very first we see the idea is taking the
impersonal turn. The ideas of punishment and reward are very material, and
they are only consonant with the idea of a human God, who loves one and hates
another, just as we do. Punishment and reward are only admissible with the
existence of such a God. They had such a God in the Samhita, and there we find
the idea of fear entering, but as soon as we come to the Upanishads, the idea of
fear vanishes, and the impersonal idea takes its place. It is naturally the hardest
thing for man to understand, this impersonal idea, for he is always clinging on
to the person. Even people who are thought to be great thinkers get disgusted at
the idea of the Impersonal God. But to me it seems so absurd to think of God as
an embodied man. Which is the higher idea, a living God, or a dead God? A
God whom nobody sees, nobody knows, or a God Known?
The Impersonal God is a living God, a principle. The difference between
personal and impersonal is this, that the personal is only a man, and the
impersonal idea is that He is the angel, the man, the animal, and yet something
more which we cannot see, because impersonality includes all personalities, is
the sum total of everything in the universe, and infinitely more besides. “As the
one fire coming into the world is manifesting itself in so many forms, and yet
is infinitely more besides,” so is the Impersonal.
We want to worship a living God. I have seen nothing but God all my life,
nor have you. To see this chair you first see God, and then the chair in and

through Him He is everywhere saying, “I am”. The moment you feel “I am”,
you are conscious of Existence. Where shall we go to find God if we cannot
see Him in our own hearts and in every living being? “Thou art the man, Thou
art the woman, Thou art the girl, and Thou art the boy. Thou art the old man
tottering with a stick. Thou art the young man walking in the pride of his
strength.” Thou art all that exists, a wonderful living God who is the only fact
in the universe. This seems to many to be a terrible contradiction to the
traditional God who lives behind a veil somewhere and whom nobody ever
sees. The priests only give us an assurance that if we follow them, listen to
their admonitions, and walk in the way they mark out for us — then when we
die, they will give us a passport to enable us to see the face of God! What are
all these heaven ideas but simply modifications of this nonsensical priestcraft?
Of course the impersonal idea is very destructive, it takes away all trade
from the priests, churches, and temples. In India there is a famine now, but
there are temples in each one of which there are jewels worth a king’s ransom!
If the priests taught this Impersonal idea to the people, their occupation would
be gone. Yet we have to teach it unselfishly, without priestcraft. You are God
and so am I; who obeys whom? Who worships whom? You are the highest
temple of God; I would rather worship you than any temple, image, or Bible.
Why are some people so contradictory in their thought? They are like fish
slipping through our fingers. They say they are hard-headed practical men.
Very good. But what is more practical than worshipping here, worshipping
you? I see you, feel you, and I know you are God. The Mohammedan says,
there is no God but Allah. The Vedanta says, there is nothing that is not God. It
may frighten many of you, but you will understand it by degrees. The living
God is within you, and yet you are building churches and temples and
believing all sorts of imaginary nonsense. The only God to worship is the
human soul in the human body. Of course all animals are temples too, but man
is the highest, the Taj Mahal of temples. If I cannot worship in that, no other
temple will be of any advantage. The moment I have realised God sitting in the
temple of every human body, the moment I stand in reverence before every
human being and see God in him — that moment I am free from bondage,
everything that binds vanishes, and I am free.
This is the most practical of all worship. It has nothing to do with theorising
and speculation. Yet it frightens many. They say it is not right. They go on
theorising about old ideals told them by their grandfathers, that a God
somewhere in heaven had told some one that he was God. Since that time we

have only theories. This is practicality according to them, and our ideas are
impractical! No doubt, the Vedanta says that each one must have his own path,
but the path is not the goal. The worship of a God in heaven and all these things
are not bad, but they are only steps towards the Truth and not the Truth itself.
They are good and beautiful, and some wonderful ideas are there, but the
Vedanta says at every point, “My friend, Him whom you are worshipping as
unknown, I worship as thee. He whom you are worshipping as unknown and
are seeking for, throughout the universe, has been with you all the time. You
are living through Him, and He is the Eternal Witness of the universe” “He
whom all the Vedas worship, nay, more, He who is always present in the
eternal ‘I’. He existing, the whole universe exists. He is the light and life of the
universe. If the ‘I’ were not in you, you would not see the sun, everything
would be a dark mass. He shining, you see the world.”
One question is generally asked, and it is this that this may lead to a
tremendous amount of difficulty. Everyone of us will think, “I am God, and
whatever I do or think must be good, for God can do no evil.” In the first place,
even taking this danger of misinterpretation for granted, can it be proved that
on the other side the same danger does not exist? They have been worshipping
a God in heaven separate from them, and of whom they are much afraid. They
have been born shaking with fear, and all their life they will go on shaking. Has
the world been made much better by this? Those who have understood and
worshipped a Personal God, and those who have understood and worshipped
an Impersonal God, on which side have been the great workers of the world —
gigantic workers, gigantic moral powers? Certainly on the Impersonal. How
can you expect morality to be developed through fear? It can never be. “Where
one sees another, where one hears another, that is Maya. When one does not see
another, when one does not hear another, when everything has become the
Atman, who sees whom, who perceives whom?” It is all He, and all I, at the
same time. The soul has become pure. Then, and then alone we understand
what love is. Love cannot come through fear, its basis is freedom. When we
really begin to love the world, then we understand what is meant by
brotherhood or mankind, and not before.
So, it is not right to say that the Impersonal idea will lead to a tremendous
amount of evil in the world, as if the other doctrine never lent itself to works
of evil, as if it did not lead to sectarianism deluging the world with blood and
causing men to tear each other to pieces. “My God is the greatest God, let us
decide it by a free fight.” That is the outcome of dualism all over the world.

Come out into the broad open light of day, come out from the little narrow
paths, for how can the infinite soul rest content to live and die in small ruts?
Come out into the universe of Light. Everything in the universe is yours,
stretch out your arms and embrace it with love. If you ever felt you wanted to
do that, you have felt God.
You remember that passage in the sermon of Buddha, how he sent a thought
of love towards the south, the north, the east, and the west, above and below,
until the whole universe was filled with this lose, so grand, great, and infinite.
When you have that feeling, you have true personality. The whole universe is
one person; let go the little things. Give up the small for the Infinite, give up
small enjoyments for infinite bliss. It is all yours, for the Impersonal includes
the Personal. So God is Personal and Impersonal at the same time. And Man,
the Infinite, Impersonal Man, is manifesting Himself as person. We the infinite
have limited ourselves, as it were, into small parts. The Vedanta says that
Infinity is our true nature; it will never vanish, it will abide for ever. But we are
limiting ourselves by our Karma, which like a chain round our necks has
dragged us into this limitation. Break that chain and be free. Trample law under
your feet. There is no law in human nature, there is no destiny, no fate. How
can there be law in infinity? Freedom is its watchword. Freedom is its nature,
its birthright. Be free, and then have any number of personalities you like.
Then we will play like the actor who comes upon the stage and plays the part of
a beggar. Contrast him with the actual beggar walking in the streets. The scene
is, perhaps, the same in both cases, the words are, perhaps, the same, but yet
what difference! The one enjoys his beggary while the other is suffering
misery from it. And what makes this difference? The one is free and the other
is bound. The actor knows his beggary is not true, but that he has assumed it
for play, while the real beggar thinks that it is his too familiar state and that he
has to bear it whether he wills it or not. This is the law. So long as we have no
knowledge of our real nature, we are beggars, jostled about by every force in
nature; and made slaves of by everything in nature; we cry all over the world
for help, but help never comes to us; we cry to imaginary beings, and yet it
never comes. But still we hope help will come, and thus in weeping, wailing,
and hoping, one life is passed, and the same play goes on and on.
Be free; hope for nothing from anyone. I am sure if you look back upon
your lives you will find that you were always vainly trying to get help from
others which never came. All the help that has come was from within
yourselves. You only had the fruits of what you yourselves worked for, and yet

you were strangely hoping all the time for help. A rich man’s parlour is always
full; but if you notice, you do not find the same people there. The visitors are
always hoping that they will get something from those wealthy men, but they
never do. So are our lives spent in hoping, hoping, hoping, which never comes
to an end. Give up hope, says the Vedanta. Why should you hope? You have
everything, nay, you are everything. What are you hoping for? If a king goes
mad, and runs about trying to find the king of his country, he will never find
him, because he is the king himself. He may go through every village and city
in his own country, seeking in every house, weeping and wailing, but he will
never find him, because he is the king himself. It is better that we know we are
God and give up this fool’s search after Him; and knowing that we are God we
become happy and contented. Give up all these mad pursuits, and then play
your part in the universe, as an actor on the stage.
The whole vision is changed, and instead of an eternal prison this world has
become a playground; instead of a land of competition it is a land of bliss,
where there is perpetual spring, flowers bloom and butterflies flit about. This
very world becomes heaven, which formerly was hell. To the eyes of the
bound it is a tremendous place of torment, but to the eyes of the free it is quite
otherwise. This one life is the universal life, heavens and all those places are
here. All the gods are here, the prototypes of man. The gods did not create man
after their type, but man created gods. And here are the prototypes, here is
Indra, here is Varuna, and all the gods of the universe. We have been projecting
our little doubles, and we are the originals of these gods, we are the real, the
only gods to be worshipped. This is the view of the Vedanta, and this its
practicality. When we have become free, we need not go mad and throw up
society and rush off to die in the forest or the cave; we shall remain where we
were, only we shall understand the whole thing. The same phenomena will
remain, but with a new meaning. We do not know the world yet; it is only
through freedom that we see what it is, and understand its nature. We shall see
then that this so-called law, or fate, or destiny occupied only an infinitesimal
part of our nature. It was only one side, but on the other side there was freedom
all the time. We did not know this, and that is why we have been trying to save
ourselves from evil by hiding our faces in the ground, like the hunted hare.
Through delusion we have been trying to forget our nature, and yet we could
not; it was always calling upon us, and all our search after God or gods, or
external freedom, was a search after our real nature. We mistook the voice. We
thought it was from the fire, or from a god or the sun, or moon, or stars, but at

last we have found that it was from within ourselves. Within ourselves is this
eternal voice speaking of eternal freedom; its music is eternally going on. Part
of this music of the Soul has become the earth, the law, this universe, but it was
always ours and always will be. In one word, the ideal of Vedanta is to know
man as he really is, and this is its message, that if you cannot worship your
brother man, the manifested God, how can you worship a God who is
unmanifested?
Do you not remember what the Bible says, “If you cannot love your brother
whom you have seen, how can you love God whom you have not seen?” If you
cannot see God in the human face, how can you see him in the clouds, or in
images made of dull, dead matter, or in mere fictitious stories of our brain? I
shall call you religious from the day you begin to see God in men and women,
and then you will understand what is meant by turning the left cheek to the man
who strikes you on the right. When you see man as God, everything, even the
tiger, will be welcome. Whatever comes to you is but the Lord, the Eternal, the
Blessed One, appearing to us in various forms, as our father, and mother, and
friend, and child — they are our own soul playing with us.
As our human relationships can thus be made divine, so our relationship
with God may take any of these forms and we can look upon Him as our father,
or mother, or friend, or beloved. Calling God Mother is a higher ideal than
calling Him Father; and to call Him Friend is still higher; but the highest is to
regard Him as the Beloved. The highest point of all is to see no difference
between lover and beloved. You may remember, perhaps, the old Persian story,
of how a lover came and knocked at the door of the beloved and was asked,
“Who are you?” He answered, “It is I”, and there was no response. A second
time he came, and exclaimed, “I am here”, but the door was not opened. The
third time he came, and the voice asked from inside, “Who is there?” He
replied, “I am thyself, my beloved”, and the door opened. So is the relation
between God and ourselves. He is in everything, He is everything. Every man
and woman is the palpable, blissful, living God. Who says God is unknown?
Who says He is to be searched after? We have found God eternally. We have
been living in Him eternally; everywhere He is eternally known, eternally
worshipped.
Then comes another idea, that other forms of worship are not errors. This is
one of the great points to be remembered, that those who worship God through
ceremonials and forms, however crude we may think them to be, are not in
error. It is the journey from truth to truth, from lower truth to higher truth.

Darkness is less light; evil is less good; impurity is less purity. It must always
be borne in mind that we should see others with eyes of love, with sympathy,
knowing that they are going along the same path that we have trodden. If you
are free, you must know that all will be so sooner or later, and if you are free,
how can you see the impermanent? If you are really pure, how do you see the
impure? For what is within, is without. We cannot see impurity without having
it inside ourselves. This is one of the practical sides of Vedanta, and I hope that
we shall all try to carry it into our lives. Our whole life here is to carry this
into practice, but the one great point we gain is that we shall work with
satisfaction and contentment, instead of with discontent and dissatisfaction, for
we know that Truth is within us, we have It as our birthright, and we have only
to manifest It, and make It tangible.
Practical Vedanta: Part III
(Delivered in London, 17th November 1896)
In the Chhâdogya Upanishad we read that a sage called Nârada came to
another called Sanatkumâra, and asked him various questions, of which one
was, if religion was the cause of things as they are. And Sanatkumara leads
him, as it were, step by step, telling him that there is something higher than this
earth, and something higher than that, and so on, till he comes to Âkâsha, ether.
Ether is higher than light, because in the ether are the sun and the moon,
lightning and the stars; in ether we live, and in ether we die. Then the question
arises, if there is anything higher than that, and Sanatkumara tells him of Prâna.
This Prana, according to the Vedanta, is the principle of life. It is like ether, an
omnipresent principle; and all motion, either in the body or anywhere else, is
the work of this Prana. It is greater than Akasha, and through it everything
lives. Prana is in the mother, in the father, in the sister, in the teacher, Prana is
the knower.
I will read another passage, where Shvetaketu asks his father about the
Truth, and the father teaches him different things, and concludes by saying,
“That which is the fine cause in all these things, of It are all these things made.
That is the All, that is Truth, thou art That, O Shvetaketu.” And then he gives
various examples. “As a bee, O Shvetaketu, gathers honey from different
flowers, and as the different honeys do not know that they are from various
trees, and from various flowers, so all of us, having come to that Existence,
know not that we have done so. Now, that which is that subtle essence, in It all

that exists has its self. It is the True. It is the Self and thou, O Shvetaketu, are
That.” He gives another example of the rivers running down to the ocean. “As
the rivers, when they are in the ocean, do not know that they have been various
rivers, even so when we come out of that Existence, we do not know that we
are That. O Shvetaketu, thou art That.” So on he goes with his teachings.
Now there are two principles of knowledge. The one principle is that we
know by referring the particular to the general, and the general to the
universal; and the second is that anything of which the explanation is sought is
to be explained so far as possible from its own nature. Taking up the first
principle, we see that all our knowledge really consists of classifications,
going higher and higher. When something happens singly, we are, as it were,
dissatisfied. When it can be shown that the same thing happens again and again,
we are satisfied and call it law. When we find that one apple falls, we are
dissatisfied; but when we find that all apples fall, we call it the law of
gravitation and are satisfied. The fact is that from the particular we deduce the
general.
When we want to study religion, we should apply this scientific process. The
same principle also holds good here, and as a fact we find that that has been the
method all through. In reading these books from which I have been translating
to you, the earliest idea that I can trace is this principle of going from the
particular to the general. We see how the “bright ones” became merged into
one principle; and likewise in the ideas of the cosmos we find the ancient
thinkers going higher and higher — from the fine elements they go to finer
and more embracing elements, and from these particulars they come to one
omnipresent ether, and from that even they go to an all embracing force, or
Prana; and through all this runs the principle, that one is not separate from the
others. It is the very ether that exists in the higher form of Prana, or the higher
form of Prana concretes, so to say, and becomes ether; and that ether becomes
still grosser, and so on.
The generalization of the Personal God is another case in point. We have
seen how this generalization was reached, and was called the sum total of all
consciousness. But a difficulty arises — it is an incomplete generalization. We
take up only one side of the facts of nature, the fact of consciousness, and upon
that we generalise, but the other side is left out. So, in the first place it is a
defective generalization. There is another insufficiency, and that relates to the
second principle. Everything should be explained from its own nature. There
may have been people who thought that every apple that fell to the ground was

dragged down by a ghost, but the explanation is the law of gravitation; and
although we know it is not a perfect explanation, yet it is much better than the
other, because it is derived from the nature of the thing itself, while the other
posits an extraneous cause. So throughout the whole range of our knowledge;
the explanation which is based upon the nature of the thing itself is a scientific
explanation, and an explanation which brings in an outside agent is
unscientific.
So the explanation of a Personal God as the creator of the universe has to
stand that test. If that God is outside of nature, having nothing to do with nature,
and this nature is the outcome of the command of that God and produced from
nothing, it is a very unscientific theory, and this has been the weak point of
every Theistic religion throughout the ages. These two defects we find in what
is generally called the theory of monotheism, the theory of a Personal God,
with all the qualities of a human being multiplied very much, who, by His will,
created this universe out of nothing and yet is separate from it. This leads us
into two difficulties.
As we have seen, it is not a sufficient generalization, and secondly, it is not
an explanation of nature from nature. It holds that the effect is not the cause,
that the cause is entirely separate from the effect. Yet all human knowledge
shows that the effect is but the cause in another form. To this idea the
discoveries of modern science are tending every day, and the latest theory that
has been accepted on all sides is the theory of evolution, the principle of which
is that the effect is but the cause in another form, a readjustment of the cause,
and the cause takes the form of the effect. The theory of creation out of nothing
would be laughed at by modern scientists.
Now, can religion stand these tests? If there be any religious theories which
can stand these two tests, they will be acceptable to the modern mind, to the
thinking mind. Any other theory which we ask the modern man to believe, on
the authority of priests, or churches, or books, he is unable to accept, and the
result is a hideous mass of unbelief. Even in those in whom there is an external
display of belief, in their hearts there is a tremendous amount of unbelief. The
rest shrink away from religion, as it were, give it up, regarding it as priestcraft
only.
Religion has been reduced to a sort of national form. It is one of our very
best social remnants; let it remain. But the real necessity which the grandfather
of the modern man felt for it is gone; he no longer finds it satisfactory to his
reason. The idea of such a Personal God, and such a creation, the idea which is

generally known as monotheism in every religion, cannot hold its own any
longer. In India it could not hold its own because of the Buddhists, and that was
the very point where they gained their victory in ancient times. They showed
that if we allow that nature is possessed of infinite power, and that nature can
work out all its wants, it is simply unnecessary to insist that there is something
besides nature. Even the soul is unnecessary.
The discussion about substance and qualities is very old, and you will
sometimes find that the old superstition lives even at the present day. Most of
you have read how, during the Middle Ages, and, I am sorry to say, even much
later, this was one of the subjects of discussion, whether qualities adhered to
substance, whether length, breadth, and thickness adhered to the substance
which we call dead matter, whether, the substance remaining, the qualities are
there or not. To this our Buddhist says, “You have no ground for maintaining
the existence of such a substance; the qualities are all that exist; you do not see
beyond them.” This is just the position of most of our modern agnostics. For it
is this fight of the substance and qualities that, on a higher plane, takes the form
of the fight between noumenon and phenomenon. There is the phenomenal
world, the universe of continuous change, and there is something behind which
does not change; and this duality of existence, noumenon and phenomenon,
some hold, is true, and others with better reason claim that you have no right to
admit the two, for what we see, feel, and think is only the phenomenon. You
have no right to assert there is anything beyond phenomenon; and there is no
answer to this. The only answer we get is from the monistic theory of the
Vedanta. It is true that only one exists, and that one is either phenomenon or
noumenon. It is not true that there are two — something changing, and, in and
through that, something which does not change; but it is the one and the same
thing which appears as changing, and which is in reality unchangeable. We
have come to think of the body, and mind, and soul as many, but really there is
only one; and that one is appearing in all these various forms. Take the wellknown illustration of the monists, the rope appearing as the snake. Some
people, in the dark or through some other cause, mistake the rope for the
snake, but when knowledge comes, the snake vanishes and it is found to be a
rope. By this illustration we see that when the snake exists in the mind, the rope
has vanished, and when the rope exists, the snake has gone. When we see
phenomenon, and phenomenon only, around us, the noumenon has vanished,
but when we see the noumenon, the unchangeable, it naturally follows that the
phenomenon has vanished. Now, we understand better the position of both the

realist and the idealist. The realist sees the phenomenon only, and the idealist
looks to the noumenon. For the idealist, the really genuine idealist, who has
truly arrived at the power of perception, whereby he can get away from all
ideas of change, for him the changeful universe has vanished, and he has the
right to say it is all delusion, there is no change. The realist at the same time
looks at the changeful. For him the unchangeable has vanished, and he has a
right to say this is all real.
What is the outcome of this philosophy? It is that the idea of Personal God is
not sufficient. We have to get to something higher, to the Impersonal idea. It is
the only logical step that we can take. Not that the personal idea would be
destroyed by that, not that we supply proof that the Personal God does not
exist, but we must go to the Impersonal for the explanation of the personal, for
the Impersonal is a much higher generalization than the personal. The
Impersonal only can be Infinite, the personal is limited. Thus we preserve the
personal and do not destroy it. Often the doubt comes to us that if we arrive at
the idea of the Impersonal God, the personal will be destroyed, if we arrive at
the idea of the Impersonal man, the personal will be lost. But the Vedantic idea
is not the destruction of the individual, but its real preservation. We cannot
prove the individual by any other means but by referring to the universal, by
proving that this individual is really the universal. If we think of the individual
as separate from everything else in the universe, it cannot stand a minute. Such
a thing never existed.
Secondly, by the application of the second principle, that the explanation of
everything must come out of the nature of the thing, we are led to a still bolder
idea, and one more difficult to understand. It is nothing less than this, that the
Impersonal Being, our highest generalization, is in ourselves, and we are That.
“O Shvetaketu, thou art That.” You are that Impersonal Being; that God for
whom you have been searching all over the universe is all the time yourself —
yourself not in the personal sense but in the Impersonal. The man we know
now, the manifested, is personalised, but the reality of this is the Impersonal.
To understand the personal we have to refer it to the Impersonal, the particular
must be referred to the general, and that Impersonal is the Truth, the Self of
man.
There will be various questions in connection with this, and I shall try to
answer them as we go on. Many difficulties will arise, but first let us clearly
understand the position of monism. As manifested beings we appear to be
separate, but our reality is one, and the less we think of ourselves as separate

from that One, the better for us. The more we think of ourselves as separate
from the Whole, the more miserable we become. From this monistic principle
we get at the basis of ethics, and I venture to say that we cannot get any ethics
from anywhere else. We know that the oldest idea of ethics was the will of
some particular being or beings, but few are ready to accept that now, because
it would be only a partial generalization. The Hindus say we must not do this
or that because the Vedas say so, but the Christian is not going to obey the
authority of the Vedas. The Christian says you must do this and not do that
because the Bible says so. That will not be binding on those who do not believe
in the Bible. But we must have a theory which is large enough to take in all
these various grounds. Just as there are millions of people who are ready to
believe in a Personal Creator, there have also been thousands of the brightest
minds in this world who felt that such ideas were not sufficient for them, and
wanted something higher, and wherever religion was not broad enough to
include all these minds, the result was that the brightest minds in society were
always outside of religion; and never was this so marked as at the present time,
especially in Europe.
To include these minds, therefore, religion must become broad enough.
Everything it claims must be judged from the standpoint of reason. Why
religions should claim that they are not bound to abide by the standpoint of
reason, no one knows. If one does not take the standard of reason, there cannot
be any true judgment, even in the case of religions. One religion may ordain
something very hideous. For instance, the Mohammedan religion allows
Mohammedans to kill all who are not of their religion. It is clearly stated in the
Koran, “Kill the infidels if they do not become Mohammedans.” They must be
put to fire and sword. Now if we tell a Mohammedan that this is wrong, he will
naturally ask, “How do you know that? How do you know it is not good? My
book says it is.” If you say your book is older, there will come the Buddhist,
and say, my book is much older still. Then will come the Hindu, and say, my
books are the oldest of all. Therefore referring to books will not do. Where is
the standard by which you can compare? You will say, look at the Sermon on
the Mount, and the Mohammedan will reply, look at the Ethics of the Koran.
The Mohammedan will say, who is the arbiter as to which is the better of the
two? Neither the New Testament nor the Koran can be the arbiter in a quarrel
between them. There must be some independent authority, and that cannot be
any book, but something which is universal; and what is more universal than
reason? It has been said that reason is not strong enough; it does not always

help us to get at the Truth; many times it makes mistakes, and, therefore, the
conclusion is that we must believe in the authority of a church! That was said to
me by a Roman Catholic, but I could not see the logic of it. On the other hand I
should say, if reason be so weak, a body of priests would be weaker, and I am
not going to accept their verdict, but I will abide by my reason, because with all
its weakness there is some chance of my getting at truth through it; while, by
the other means, there is no such hope at all.
We should, therefore, follow reason and also sympathise with those who do
not come to any sort of belief, following reason. For it is better that mankind
should become atheist by following reason than blindly believe in two hundred
millions of gods on the authority of anybody. What we want is progress,
development, realisation. No theories ever made men higher. No amount of
books can help us to become purer. The only power is in realisation, and that
lies in ourselves and comes from thinking. Let men think. A clod of earth never
thinks; but it remains only a lump of earth. The glory of man is that he is a
thinking being. It is the nature of man to think and therein he differs from
animals. I believe in reason and follow reason having seen enough of the evils
of authority, for I was born in a country where they have gone to the extreme
of authority.
The Hindus believe that creation has come out of the Vedas. How do you
know there is a cow? Because the word cow is in the Vedas. How do you know
there is a man outside? Because the word man is there. If it had not been, there
would have been no man outside. That is what they say. Authority with a
vengeance! And it is not studied as I have studied it, but some of the most
powerful minds have taken it up and spun out wonderful logical theories round
it. They have reasoned it out, and there it stands — a whole system of
philosophy; and thousands of the brightest intellects hare been dedicated
through thousands of years to the working out of this theory. Such has been the
power of authority, and great are the dangers thereof. It stunts the growth of
humanity, and we must not forget that we want growth. Even in all relative
truth, more than the truth itself, we want the exercise. That is our life.
The monistic theory has this merit that it is the most rational of all the
religious theories that we can conceive of. Every other theory, every
conception of God which is partial and little and personal is not rational. And
yet monism has this grandeur that it embraces all these partial conceptions of
God as being necessary for many. Some people say that this personal
explanation is irrational. But it is consoling; they want a consoling religion and

we understand that it is necessary for them. The clear light of truth very few in
this life can bear, much less live up to. It is necessary, therefore, that this
comfortable religion should exist; it helps many souls to a better one. Small
minds whose circumference is very limited and which require little things to
build them up, never venture to soar high in thought. Their conceptions are
very good and helpful to them, even if only of little gods and symbols. But you
have to understand the Impersonal, for it is in and through that alone that these
others can be explained. Take, for instance, the idea of a Personal God. A man
who understands and believes in the Impersonal — John Stuart Mill, for
example — may say that a Personal God is impossible, and cannot be proved. I
admit with him that a Personal God cannot be demonstrated. But He is the
highest reading of the Impersonal that can be reached by the human intellect,
and what else is the universe but various readings of the Absolute? It is like a
book before us, and each one has brought his intellect to read it, and each one
has to read it for himself. There is something which is common in the intellect
of all men; therefore certain things appear to be the same to the intellect of
mankind. That you and I see a chair proves that there is something common to
both our minds. Suppose a being comes with another sense, he will not see the
chair at all; but all beings similarly constituted will see the same things. Thus
this universe itself is the Absolute, the unchangeable, the noumenon; and the
phenomenon constitutes the reading thereof. For you will first find that all
phenomena are finite. Every phenomenon that we can see, feel, or think of, is
finite, limited by our knowledge, and the Personal God as we conceive of Him
is in fact a phenomenon. The very idea of causation exists only in the
phenomenal world, and God as the cause of this universe must naturally be
thought of as limited, and yet He is the same Impersonal God. This very
universe, as we have seen, is the same Impersonal Being read by our intellect.
Whatever is reality in the universe is that Impersonal Being, and the forms and
conceptions are given to it by our intellects. Whatever is real in this table is that
Being, and the table form and all other forms are given by our intellects.
Now, motion, for instance, which is a necessary adjunct of the phenomenal,
cannot be predicated of the Universal. Every little bit, every atom inside the
universe, is in a constant state of change and motion, but the universe as a
whole is unchangeable, because motion or change is a relative thing; we can
only think of something in motion in comparison with something which is not
moving. There must be two things in order to understand motion. The whole
mass of the universe, taken as a unit, cannot move. In regard to what will it

move? It cannot be said to change. With regard to what will it change? So the
whole is the Absolute; but within it every particle is in a constant state of flux
and change. It is unchangeable and changeable at the same time, Impersonal
and Personal in one. This is our conception of the universe, of motion and of
God, and that is what is meant by “Thou art That”. Thus we see that the
Impersonal instead of doing away with the personal, the Absolute instead of
pulling down the relative, only explains it to the full satisfaction of our reason
and heart. The Personal God and all that exists in the universe are the same
Impersonal Being seen through our minds. When we shall be rid of our minds,
our little personalities, we shall become one with It. This is what is meant by
“Thou art That”. For we must know our true nature, the Absolute.
The finite, manifested man forgets his source and thinks himself to be
entirely separate. We, as personalised, differentiated beings, forget our reality,
and the teaching of monism is not that we shall give up these differentiations,
but we must learn to understand what they are. We are in reality that Infinite
Being, and our personalities represent so many channels through which this
Infinite Reality is manifesting Itself; and the whole mass of changes which we
call evolution is brought about by the soul trying to manifest more and more
of its infinite energy. We cannot stop anywhere on this side of the Infinite; our
power, and blessedness, and wisdom, cannot but grow into the Infinite. Infinite
power and existence and blessedness are ours, and we have not to acquire
them; they are our own, and we have only to manifest them.
This is the central idea of monism, and one that is so hard to understand.
From my childhood everyone around me taught weakness; I have been told
ever since I was born that I was a weak thing. It is very difficult for me now to
realise my own strength, but by analysis and reasoning I gain knowledge of my
own strength, I realise it. All the knowledge that we have in this world, where
did it come from? It was within us. What knowledge is outside? None.
Knowledge was not in matter; it was in man all the time. Nobody ever created
knowledge; man brings it from within. It is lying there. The whole of that big
banyan tree which covers acres of ground, was in the little seed which was,
perhaps, no bigger than one eighth of a mustard seed; all that mass of energy
was there confined. The gigantic intellect, we know, lies coiled up in the
protoplasmic cell, and why should not the infinite energy? We know that it is
so. It may seem like a paradox, but is true. Each one of us has come out of one
protoplasmic cell, and all the powers we possess were coiled up there. You
cannot say they came from food; for if you heap up food mountains high, what

power comes out of it? The energy was there, potentially no doubt, but still
there. So is infinite power in the soul of man, whether he knows it or not. Its
manifestation is only a question of being conscious of it. Slowly this infinite
giant is, as it were, waking up, becoming conscious of his power, and arousing
himself; and with his growing consciousness, more and more of his bonds are
breaking, chains are bursting asunder, and the day is sure to come when, with
the full consciousness of his infinite power and wisdom, the giant will rise to
his feet and stand erect. Let us all help to hasten that glorious consummation.
Practical Vedanta: Part IV
(Delivered in London, 18th November 1896)
We have been dealing more with the universal so far. This morning I shall
try to place before you the Vedantic ideas of the relation of the particular to the
universal. As we have seen, in the dualistic form of Vedic doctrines, the earlier
forms, there was a clearly defined particular and limited soul for every being.
There have been a great many theories about this particular soul in each
individual, but the main discussion was between the ancient Vedantists and the
ancient Buddhists, the former believing in the individual soul as complete in
itself, the latter denying in toto the existence of such an individual soul. As I
told you the other day, it is pretty much the same discussion you have in
Europe as to substance and quality, one set holding that behind the qualities
there is something as substance, in which the qualities inhere; and the other
denying the existence of such a substance as being unnecessary, for the
qualities may live by themselves. The most ancient theory of the soul, of
course, is based upon the argument of self-identity — “I am I” — that the I of
yesterday is the I of today, and the I of today will be the I of tomorrow; that in
spite of all the changes that are happening to the body, I yet believe that I am the
same I. This seems to have been the central argument with those who believed
in a limited, and yet perfectly complete, individual soul.
On the other hand, the ancient Buddhists denied the necessity of such an
assumption. They brought forward the argument that all that we know, and all
that we possibly can know, are simply these changes. The positing of an
unchangeable and unchanging substance is simply superfluous, and even if
there were any such unchangeable thing, we could never understand it, nor
should we ever be able to cognise it in any sense of the word. The same
discussion you will find at the present time going on in Europe between the

religionists and the idealists on the one side, and the modern positivists and
agnostics on the other; one set believing there is something which does not
change (of whom the latest representative is your Herbert Spencer), that we
catch a glimpse of something which is unchangeable. And the other is
represented by the modern Comtists and modern Agnostics. Those of you who
were interested a few years ago in the discussions between Herbert Spencer
and Frederick Harrison might have noticed that it was the same old difficulty,
the one party standing for a substance behind the changeful, and the other party
denying the necessity for such an assumption. One party says we cannot
conceive of changes without conceiving of something which does not change;
the other party brings out the argument that this is superfluous; we can only
conceive of something which is changing, and as to the unchanging, we can
neither know, feel, nor sense it.
In India this great question did not find its solution in very ancient times,
because we have seen that the assumption of a substance which is behind the
qualities, and which is not the qualities, can never be substantiated; nay, even
the argument from self-identity, from memory, — that I am the I of yesterday
because I remember it, and therefore I have been a continuous something —
cannot be substantiated. The other quibble that is generally put forward is a
mere delusion of words. For instance, a man may take a long series of such
sentences as “I do”, “I go”, “I dream”, “I sleep”, “I move”, and here you will
find it claimed that the doing, going, dreaming etc., have been changing, but
what remained constant was that “I”. As such they conclude that the “I” is
something which is constant and an individual in itself, but all these changes
belong to the body. This, though apparently very convincing and clear, is based
upon the mere play on words. The “I” and the doing, going, and dreaming may
be separate in black and white, but no one can separate them in his mind.
When I eat, I think of myself as eating — am identified with eating. When I
run, I and the running are not two separate things. Thus the argument from
personal identity does not seem to be very strong. The other argument from
memory is also weak. If the identity of my being is represented by my
memory, many things which I have forgotten are lost from that identity. And
we know that people under certain conditions forget their whole past. In many
cases of lunacy a man will think of himself as made of glass, or as being an
animal. If the existence of that man depends on memory, he has become glass,
which not being the case we cannot make the identity of the Self depend on
such a flimsy substance as memory. Thus we see that the soul as a limited yet

complete and continuing identity cannot be established as separate from the
qualities. We cannot establish a narrowed-down, limited existence to which is
attached a bunch of qualities.
On the other hand, the argument of the ancient Buddhists seems to be
stronger — that we do not know, and cannot know, anything that is beyond the
bunch of qualities. According to them, the soul consists of a bundle of qualities
called sensations and feelings. A mass of such is what is called the soul, and
this mass is continually changing.
The Advaitist theory of the soul reconciles both these positions. The
position of the Advaitist is that it is true that we cannot think of the substance as
separate from the qualities, we cannot think of change and not-change at the
same time; it would be impossible. But the very thing which is the substance is
the quality; substance and quality are not two things. It is the unchangeable that
is appearing as the changeable. The unchangeable substance of the universe is
not something separate from it. The noumenon is not something different from
the phenomena, but it is the very noumenon which has become the phenomena.
There is a soul which is unchanging, and what we call feelings and
perceptions, nay, even the body, are the very soul, seen from another point of
view. We have got into the habit of thinking that we have bodies and souls and
so forth, but really speaking, there is only one.
When I think of myself as the body, I am only a body; it is meaningless to
say I am something else. And when I think of myself as the soul, the body
vanishes, and the perception of the body does not remain. None can get the
perception of the Self without his perception of the body having vanished, none
can get perception of the substance without his perception of the qualities
having vanished.
The ancient illustration of Advaita, of the rope being taken for a snake, may
elucidate the point a little more. When a man mistakes the rope for a snake, the
rope has vanished, and when he takes it for a rope, the snake has vanished, and
the rope only remains. The ideas of dual or treble existence come from
reasoning on insufficient data, and we read them in books or hear about them,
until we come under the delusion that we really have a dual perception of the
soul and the body; but such a perception never really exists. The perception is
either of the body or of the soul. It requires no arguments to prove it, you can
verify it in your own minds.
Try to think of yourself as a soul, as a disembodied something. You will
find it to be almost impossible, and those few who are able to do so will find

that at the time when they realise themselves as a soul they have no idea of the
body. You have heard of, or perhaps have seen, persons who on particular
occasions had been in peculiar states of mind, brought about by deep
meditation, self-hypnotism, hysteria, or drugs. From their experience you may
gather that when they were perceiving the internal something, the external had
vanished for them. This shows that whatever exists is one. That one is
appearing in these various forms, and all these various forms give rise to the
relation of cause and effect. The relation of cause and effect is one of evolution
— the one becomes the other, and so on. Sometimes the cause vanishes, as it
were, and in its place leaves the effect. If the soul is the cause of the body, the
soul, as it were vanishes for the time being, and the body remains; and when
the body vanishes, the soul remains. This theory fits the arguments of the
Buddhists that were levelled against the assumption of the dualism of body and
soul, by denying the duality, and showing that the substance and the qualities
are one and the same thing appearing in various forms.
We have seen also that this idea of the unchangeable can be established only
as regards the whole, but never as regards the part. The very idea of part
comes from the idea of change or motion. Everything that is limited we can
understand and know, because it is changeable; and the whole must be
unchangeable, because there is no other thing besides it in relation to which
change would be possible. Change is always in regard to something which
does not change, or which changes relatively less.
According to Advaita, therefore, the idea of the soul as universal,
unchangeable, and immortal can be demonstrated as far as possible. The
difficulty would be as regards the particular. What shall we do with the old
dualistic theories which have such a hold upon us, and which we have all to
pass through — these beliefs in limited, little, individual souls?
We have seen that we are immortal with regard to the whole; but the
difficulty is, we desire so much to be immortal as parts of the whole. We have
seen that we are Infinite, and that that is our real individuality. But we want so
much to make these little souls individual. What becomes of them when we find
in our everyday experience that these little souls are individuals, with only this
reservation that they are continuously growing individuals? They are the same,
yet not the same. The I of yesterday is the I of today, and yet not so, it is
changed somewhat. Now, by getting rid of the dualistic conception, that in the
midst of all these changes there is something that does not change, and taking
the most modern of conceptions, that of evolution, we find that the “I” is a

continuously changing, expanding entity.
If it be true that man is the evolution of a mollusc, the mollusc individual is
the same as the man, only it has to become expanded a great deal. From
mollusc to man it has been a continuous expansion towards infinity. Therefore
the limited soul can be styled an individual which is continuously expanding
towards the Infinite Individual. Perfect individuality will only be reached when
it has reached the Infinite, but on this side of the Infinite it is a continuously
changing, growing personality. One of the remarkable features of the Advaitist
system of Vedanta is to harmonise the preceding systems. In many cases it
helped the philosophy very much; in some cases it hurt it. Our ancient
philosophers knew what you call the theory of evolution; that growth is
gradual, step by step, and the recognition of this led them to harmonise all the
preceding systems. Thus not one of these preceding ideas was rejected. The
fault of the Buddhistic faith was that it had neither the faculty nor the perception
of this continual, expansive growth, and for this reason it never even made an
attempt to harmonise itself with the preexisting steps towards the ideal. They
were rejected as useless and harmful.
This tendency in religion is most harmful. A man gets a new and better idea,
and then he looks back on those he has given up, and forthwith decides that
they were mischievous and unnecessary. He never thinks that, however crude
they may appear from his present point of view, they were very useful to him,
that they were necessary for him to reach his present state, and that everyone of
us has to grow in a similar fashion, living first on crude ideas, taking benefit
from them, and then arriving at a higher standard. With the oldest theories,
therefore, the Advaita is friendly. Dualism and all systems that had preceded it
are accepted by the Advaita not in a patronising way, but with the conviction
that they are true manifestations of the same truth, and that they all lead to the
same conclusions as the Advaita has reached.
With blessing, and not with cursing, should be preserved all these various
steps through which humanity has to pass. Therefore all these dualistic systems
have never been rejected or thrown out, but have been kept intact in the
Vedanta; and the dualistic conception of an individual soul, limited yet
complete in itself, finds its place in the Vedanta.
According to dualism, man dies and goes to other worlds, and so forth; and
these ideas are kept in the Vedanta in their entirety. For with the recognition of
growth in the Advaitist system, these theories are given their proper place by
admitting that they represent only a partial view of the Truth.

From the dualistic standpoint this universe can only be looked upon as a
creation of matter or force, can only be looked upon as the play of a certain
will, and that will again can only be looked upon as separate from the universe.
Thus a man from such a standpoint has to see himself as composed of a dual
nature, body and soul, and this soul, though limited, is individually complete in
itself. Such a man’s ideas of immortality and of the future life would
necessarily accord with his idea of soul. These phases have been kept in the
Vedanta, and it is, therefore, necessary for me to present to you a few of the
popular ideas of dualism. According to this theory, we have a body, of course,
and behind the body there is what they call a fine body. This fine body is also
made of matter, only very fine. It is the receptacle of all our Karma, of all our
actions and impressions, which are ready to spring up into visible forms.
Every thought that we think, every deed that we do, after a certain time
becomes fine, goes into seed form, so to speak, and lives in the fine body in a
potential form, and after a time it emerges again and bears its results. These
results condition the life of man. Thus he moulds his own life. Man is not
bound by any other laws excepting those which he makes for himself. Our
thoughts, our words and deeds are the threads of the net which we throw round
ourselves, for good or for evil. Once we set in motion a certain power, we
have to take the full consequences of it. This is the law of Karma. Behind the
subtle body, lives Jiva or the individual soul of man. There are various
discussions about the form and the size of this individual soul. According to
some, it is very small like an atom; according to others, it is not so small as
that; according to others, it is very big, and so on. This Jiva is a part of that
universal substance, and it is also eternal; without beginning it is existing, and
without end it will exist. It is passing through all these forms in order to
manifest its real nature which is purity. Every action that retards this
manifestation is called an evil action; so with thoughts. And every action and
every thought that helps the Jiva to expand, to manifest its real nature, is good.
One theory that is held in common in India by the crudest dualists as well as by
the most advanced non-dualists is that all the possibilities and powers of the
soul are within it, and do not come from any external source. They are in the
soul in potential form, and the whole work of life is simply directed towards
manifesting those potentialities.
They have also the theory of reincarnation which says that after the
dissolution of this body, the Jiva will have another, and after that has been
dissolved, it will again have another, and so on, either here or in some other

worlds; but this world is given the preference, as it is considered the best of all
worlds for our purpose. Other worlds are conceived of as worlds where there
is very little misery, but for that very reason, they argue, there is less chance of
thinking of higher things there. As this world contains some happiness and a
good deal of misery, the Jiva some time or other gets awakened, as it were, and
thinks of freeing itself. But just as very rich persons in this world have the least
chance of thinking of higher things, so the Jiva in heaven has little chance of
progress, for its condition is the same as that of a rich man, only more
intensified; it has a very fine body which knows no disease, and is under no
necessity of eating or drinking, and all its desires are fulfilled. The Jiva lives
there, having enjoyment after enjoyment, and so forgets all about its real
nature. Still there are some higher worlds, where in spite of all enjoyments, its
further evolution is possible. Some dualists conceive of the goal as the highest
heaven, where souls will live with God for ever. They will have beautiful
bodies and will know neither disease nor death, nor any other evil, and all their
desires will be fulfilled. From time to time some of them will come back to
this earth and take another body to teach human beings the way to God; and the
great teachers of the world have been such. They were already free, and were
living with God in the highest sphere; but their love and sympathy for
suffering humanity was so great that they came and incarnated again to teach
mankind the way to heaven.
Of course we know that the Advaita holds that this cannot be the goal or the
ideal; bodilessness must be the ideal. The ideal cannot be finite. Anything short
of the Infinite cannot be the ideal, and there cannot be an infinite body. That
would be impossible, as body comes from limitation. There cannot be infinite
thought, because thought comes from limitation. We have to go beyond the
body, and beyond thought too, says the Advaita. And we have also seen that,
according to Advaita, this freedom is not to be attained, it is already ours. We
only forget it and deny it. Perfection is not to be attained, it is already within us.
Immortality and bliss are not to be acquired, we possess them already; they
have been ours all the time.
If you dare declare that you are free, free you are this moment. If you say
you are bound, bound you will remain. This is what Advaita boldly declares. I
have told you the ideas of the dualists. You can take whichever you like.
The highest ideal of the Vedanta is very difficult to understand, and people
are always quarrelling about it, and the greatest difficulty is that when they get
hold of certain ideas, they deny and fight other ideas. Take up what suits you,

and let others take up what they need. If you are desirous of clinging to this
little individuality, to this limited manhood, remain in it, have all these desires,
and be content and pleased with them. If your experience of manhood has been
very good and nice, retain it as long as you like; and you can do so, for you
are the makers of your own fortunes; none can compel you to give up your
manhood. You will be men as long as you like; none can prevent you. If you
want to be angels, you will be angels, that is the law. But there may be others
who do not want to be angels even. What right have you to think that theirs is a
horrible notion? You may be frightened to lose a hundred pounds, but there
may be others who would not even wink if they lost all the money they had in
the world. There have been such men and still there are. Why do you dare to
judge them according to your standard? You cling on to your limitations, and
these little worldly ideas may be your highest ideal. You are welcome to them.
It will be to you as you wish. But there are others who have seen the truth and
cannot rest in these limitations, who have done with these things and want to
get beyond. The world with all its enjoyments is a mere mud-puddle for them.
Why do you want to bind them down to your ideas? You must get rid of this
tendency once for all. Accord a place to everyone.
I once read a story about some ships that were caught in a cyclone in the
South Sea Islands, and there was a picture of it in the Illustrated London News.
All of them were wrecked except one English vessel, which weathered the
storm. The picture showed the men who were going to be drowned, standing
on the decks and cheering the people who were sailing through the storm
(H.M.S. Calliope and the American men-of-war at Samoa. — Ed). Be brave and generous like
that. Do not drag others down to where you are. Another foolish notion is that
if we lose our little individuality, there will be no morality, no hope for
humanity. As if everybody had been dying for humanity all the time! God bless
you! If in every country there were two hundred men and women really
wanting to do good to humanity, the millennium would come in five days. We
know how we are dying for humanity! These are all tall talks, and nothing else.
The history of the world shows that those who never thought of their little
individuality were the greatest benefactors of the human race, and that the more
men and women think of themselves, the less are they able to do for others.
One is unselfishness, and the other selfishness. Clinging on to little
enjoyments, and to desire the continuation and repetition of this state of things
is utter selfishness. It arises not from any desire for truth, its genesis is not in
kindness for other beings, but in the utter selfishness of the human heart, in the

idea, “I will have everything, and do not care for anyone else.” This is as it
appears to me. I would like to see more moral men in the world like some of
those grand old prophets and sages of ancient times who would have given up
a hundred lives if they could by so doing benefit one little animal! Talk of
morality and doing good to others! Silly talk of the present time!
I would like to see moral men like Gautama Buddha, who did not believe in
a Personal God or a personal soul, never asked about them, but was a perfect
agnostic, and yet was ready to lay down his life for anyone, and worked all his
life for the good of all, and thought only of the good of all. Well has it been
said by his biographer, in describing his birth, that he was born for the good of
the many, as a blessing to the many. He did not go to the forest to meditate for
his own salvation; he felt that the world was burning, and that he must find a
way out. “Why is there so much misery in the world ?” — was the one question
that dominated his whole life. Do you think we are so moral as the Buddha?
The more selfish a man, the more immoral he is. And so also with the race.
That race which is bound down to itself has been the most cruel and the most
wicked in the whole world. There has not been a religion that has clung to this
dualism more than that founded by the Prophet of Arabia, and there has not
been a religion which has shed so much blood and been so cruel to other men.
In the Koran there is the doctrine that a man who does not believe these
teachings should be killed; it is a mercy to kill him! And the surest way to get
to heaven, where there are beautiful houris and all sorts of sense-enjoyments,
is by killing these unbelievers. Think of the bloodshed there has been in
consequence of such beliefs!
In the religion of Christ there was little of crudeness; there is very little
difference between the pure religion of Christ and that of the Vedanta. You find
there the idea of oneness; but Christ also preached dualistic ideas to the people
in order to give them something tangible to take hold of, to lead them up to the
highest ideal. The same Prophet who preached, “Our Father which art in
heaven”, also preached, “I and my Father are one”, and the same Prophet knew
that through the “Father in heaven” lies the way to the “I and my Father are
one”. There was only blessing and love in the religion of Christ; but as soon as
crudeness crept in, it was degraded into something not much better than the
religion of the Prophet of Arabia. It was crudeness indeed — this fight for the
little self, this clinging on to the “I”, not only in this life, but also in the desire
for its continuance even after death. This they declare to be unselfishness; this
the foundation of morality! Lord help us, if this be the foundation of morality!

And strangely enough, men and women who ought to know better think all
morality will be destroyed if these little selves go and stand aghast at the idea
that morality can only stand upon their destruction. The watchword of all wellbeing, of all moral good is not “I” but “thou”. Who cares whether there is a
heaven or a hell, who cares if there is a soul or not, who cares if there is an
unchangeable or not? Here is the world, and it is full of misery. Go out into it
as Buddha did, and struggle to lessen it or die in the attempt. Forget yourselves;
this is the first lesson to be learnt, whether you are a theist or an atheist,
whether you are an agnostic or a Vedantist, a Christian or a Mohammedan. The
one lesson obvious to all is the destruction of the little self and the building up
of the Real Self.
Two forces have been working side by side in parallel lines. The one says
“I”, the other says “not I”. Their manifestation is not only in man but in
animals, not only in animals but in the smallest worms. The tigress that plunges
her fangs into the warm blood of a human being would give up her own life to
protect her young. The most depraved man who thinks nothing of taking the
lives of his brother men will, perhaps, sacrifice himself without any hesitation
to save his starving wife and children. Thus throughout creation these two
forces are working side by side; where you find the one, you find the other too.
The one is selfishness, the other is unselfishness. The one is acquisition, the
other is renunciation. The one takes, the other gives. From the lowest to the
highest, the whole universe is the playground of these two forces. It does not
require any demonstration; it is obvious to all.
What right has any section of the community to base the whole work and
evolution of the universe upon one of these two factors alone, upon
competition and struggle? What right has it to base the whole working of the
universe upon passion and fight, upon competition and struggle? That these
exist we do not deny; but what right has anyone to deny the working of the
other force? Can any man deny that love, this “not I”, this renunciation is the
only positive power in the universe? That other is only the misguided
employment of the power of love; the power of love brings competition, the
real genesis of competition is in love. The real genesis of evil is in
unselfishness. The creator of evil is good, and the end is also good. It is only
misdirection of the power of good. A man who murders another is, perhaps,
moved to do so by the love of his own child. His love has become limited to
that one little baby, to the exclusion of the millions of other human beings in
the universe. Yet, limited or unlimited, it is the same love.

Thus the motive power of the whole universe, in what ever way it manifests
itself, is that one wonderful thing, unselfishness, renunciation, love, the real,
the only living force in existence. Therefore the Vedantist insists upon that
oneness. We insist upon this explanation because we cannot admit two causes
of the universe. If we simply hold that by limitation the same beautiful,
wonderful love appears to be evil or vile, we find the whole universe explained
by the one force of love. If not, two causes of the universe have to be taken for
granted, one good and the other evil, one love and the other hatred. Which is
more logical? Certainly the one-force theory.
Let us now pass on to things which do not possibly belong to dualism. I
cannot stay longer with the dualists. I am afraid. My idea is to show that the
highest ideal of morality and unselfishness goes hand in hand with the highest
metaphysical conception, and that you need not lower your conception to get
ethics and morality, but, on the other hand, to reach a real basis of morality and
ethics you must have the highest philosophical and scientific conceptions.
Human knowledge is not antagonistic to human well-being. On the contrary, it
is knowledge alone that will save us in every department of life — in
knowledge is worship. The more we know the better for us. The Vedantist says,
the cause of all that is apparently evil is the limitation of the unlimited. The
love which gets limited into little channels and seems to be evil eventually
comes out at the other end and manifests itself as God. The Vedanta also says
that the cause of all this apparent evil is in ourselves. Do not blame any
supernatural being, neither be hopeless and despondent, nor think we are in a
place from which we can never escape unless someone comes and lends us a
helping hand. That cannot be, says the Vedanta. We are like silkworms; we
make the thread out of our own substance and spin the cocoon, and in course
of time are imprisoned inside. But this is not for ever. In that cocoon we shall
develop spiritual realisation, and like the butterfly come out free. This network
of Karma we have woven around ourselves; and in our ignorance we feel as if
we are bound, and weep and wail for help. But help does not come from
without; it comes from within ourselves. Cry to all the gods in the universe. I
cried for years, and in the end I found that I was helped. But help came from
within. And I had to undo what I had done by mistake. That is the only way. I
had to cut the net which I had thrown round myself, and the power to do this is
within. Of this I am certain that not one aspiration, well-guided or ill-guided in
my life, has been in vain, but that I am the resultant of all my past, both good
and evil. I have committed many mistakes in my life; but mark you, I am sure

of this that without every one of those mistakes I should not be what I am today,
and so am quite satisfied to have made them. I do not mean that you are to go
home and wilfully commit mistakes; do not misunderstand me in that way. But
do not mope because of the mistakes you have committed, but know that in the
end all will come out straight. It cannot be otherwise, because goodness is our
nature, purity is our nature, and that nature can never be destroyed. Our
essential nature always remains the same.
What we are to understand is this, that what we call mistakes or evil, we
commit because we are weak, and we are weak because we are ignorant. I
prefer to call them mistakes. The word sin, although originally a very good
word, has got a certain flavour about it that frightens me. Who makes us
ignorant? We ourselves. We put our hands over our eyes and weep that it is
dark. Take the hands away and there is light; the light exists always for us, the
self-effulgent nature of the human soul. Do you not hear what your modern
scientific men say? What is the cause of evolution? Desire. The animal wants to
do something, but does not find the environment favourable, and therefore
develops a new body. Who develops it? The animal itself, its will. You have
developed from the lowest amoeba. Continue to exercise your will and it will
take you higher still. The will is almighty. If it is almighty, you may say, why
cannot I do everything? But you are thinking only of your little self. Look back
on yourselves from the state of the amoeba to the human being; who made all
that? Your own will. Can you deny then that it is almighty? That which has
made you come up so high can make you go higher still. What you want is
character, strengthening of the will.
If I teach you, therefore, that your nature is evil, that you should go home
and sit in sackcloth and ashes and weep your lives out because you took certain
false steps, it will not help you, but will weaken you all the more, and I shall be
showing you the road to more evil than good. If this room is full of darkness
for thousands of years and you come in and begin to weep and wail, “Oh the
darkness”, will the darkness vanish? Strike a match and light comes in a
moment. What good will it do you to think all your lives, “Oh, I have done
evil, I have made many mistakes”? It requires no ghost to tell us that. Bring in
the light and the evil goes in a moment. Build up your character, and manifest
your real nature, the Effulgent, the Resplendent, the Ever-Pure, and call It up in
everyone that you see. I wish that everyone of us had come to such a state that
even in the vilest of human beings we could see the Real Self within, and
instead of condemning them, say, “Rise thou effulgent one, rise thou who art

always pure, rise thou birthless and deathless, rise almighty, and manifest thy
true nature. These little manifestations do not befit thee.” This is the highest
prayer that the Advaita teaches. This is the one prayer, to remember our true
nature, the God who is always within us, thinking of it always as infinite,
almighty, ever-good, ever-beneficent, selfless, bereft of all limitations. And
because that nature is selfless, it is strong and fearless; for only to selfishness
comes fear. He who has nothing to desire for himself, whom does he fear, and
what can frighten him? What fear has death for him? What fear has evil for
him? So if we are Advaitists, we must think from this moment that our old self
is dead and gone. The old Mr., Mrs., and Miss So-and-so are gone, they were
mere superstitions, and what remains is the ever-pure, the ever-strong, the
almighty, the all-knowing — that alone remains for us, and then all fear
vanishes from us. Who can injure us, the omnipresent? All weakness has
vanished from us, and our only work is to arouse this knowledge in our
fellowbeings. We see that they too are the same pure self, only they do not
know it; we must teach them, we must help them to rouse up their infinite
nature. This is what I feel to be absolutely necessary all over the world. These
doctrines are old, older than many mountains possibly. All truth is eternal.
Truth is nobody’s property; no race, no individual can lay any exclusive claim
to it. Truth is the nature of all souls. Who can lay an, special claim to it? But it
has to be made practical, to be made simple (for the highest truths are always
simple), so that it may penetrate every pore of human society, and become the
property of the highest intellects and the commonest minds, of the man,
woman, and child at the same time. All these ratiocinations of logic, all these
bundles of metaphysics, all these theologies and ceremonies may have been
good in their own time, but let us try to make things simpler and bring about
the golden days when every man will be a worshipper, and the Reality in every
man will be the object of worship.
The Way To The Realisation Of A Universal Religion
(Delivered in the Universalist Church, Pasadena,
California, 28th January 1900)
No search has been dearer to the human heart than that which brings to us
light from God. No study has taken so much of human energy, whether in
times past or present, as the study of the soul, of God, and of human destiny.

However immersed we are in our daily occupations, in our ambitions, in our
work, in the midst of the greatest of our struggles, sometimes there will come
a pause; the mind stops and wants to know something beyond this world.
Sometimes it catches glimpses of a realm beyond the senses, and a struggle to
get at it is the result. Thus it has been throughout the ages, in all countries. Man
has wanted to look beyond, wanted to expand himself; and all that we call
progress, evolution, has been always measured by that one search, the search
for human destiny, the search for God.
As our social struggles are represented amongst different nations by
different social organizations, so is man’s spiritual struggle represented by
various religions; and as different social organizations are constantly
quarrelling, are constantly at war with one another, so these spiritual
organisations have been constantly at war with one another, constantly
quarrelling. Men belonging to a particular social organisation claim that the
right to live only belongs to them; and so long as they can, they want to
exercise that right at the cost of the weak. We know that just now there is a
fierce struggle of that sort going on in South Africa. Similarly, each religious
sect has claimed the exclusive right to live. And thus we find that though there
is nothing that has brought to man more blessings than religion, yet at the same
time, there is nothing that has brought more horror than religion. Nothing has
made more for peace and love than religion; nothing has engendered fiercer
hatred than religion. Nothing has made the brotherhood of man more tangible
than religion; nothing has bred more bitter enmity between man and man than
religion. Nothing has built more charitable institutions, more hospitals for
men, and even for animals, than religion; nothing has deluged the world with
more blood than religion. We know, at the same time, that there has always
been an undercurrent of thought; there have been always parties of men,
philosophers, students of comparative religion who have tried and are still
trying to bring about harmony in the midst of all these jarring and discordant
sects. As regards certain countries, these attempts have succeeded, but as
regards the whole world, they have failed.
There are some religions which have come down to us from the remotest
antiquity, which are imbued with the idea that all sects should be allowed to
live, that every sect has a meaning, a great idea, imbedded within itself, and,
therefore it is necessary for the good of the world and ought to be helped. In
modern times the same idea is prevailing and attempts are made from time to
time to reduce it to practice. These attempts do not always come up to our

expectations, up to the required efficiency. Nay, to our great disappointment,
we sometimes find that we are quarrelling all the more.
Now, leaving aside dogmatic study, and taking a common-sense view of the
thing, we find at the start that there is a tremendous life-power in all the great
religions of the world. Some may say that they are ignorant of this, but
ignorance is no excuse. If a man says “I do not know what is going on in the
external world, therefore things that are going on in the external world do not
exist”, that man is inexcusable. Now, those of you that watch the movement of
religious thought all over the world are perfectly aware that not one of the
great religions of the world has died; not only so, each one of them is
progressive. Christians are multiplying, Mohammedans are multiplying, the
Hindus are gaining ground, and the Jews also are increasing, and by their
spreading all over the world and increasing rapidly, the fold of Judaism is
constantly expanding.
Only one religion of the world — an ancient, great religion — has dwindled
away, and that is the religion of Zoroastrianism, the religion of the ancient
Persians. Under the Mohammedan conquest of Persia about a hundred thousand
of these people came and took shelter in India and some remained in ancient
Persia. Those that were in Persia, under the constant persecution of the
Mohammedans, dwindled down till there are at most only ten thousand; in India
there are about eighty thousand of them, but they do not increase. Of course,
there is an initial difficulty; they do not convert others to their religion. And
then, this handful of persons living in India, with the pernicious custom of
cousin marriage, do not multiply. With this single exception, all the great
religions are living, spreading, and increasing. We must remember that all the
great religions of the world are very ancient, not one has been formed at the
present time, and that every religion of the world owes its origin to the country
between the Ganga and the Euphrates; not one great religion has arisen in
Europe, not one in America, not one; every religion is of Asiatic origin and
belongs to that part of the world. If what the modern scientists say is true, that
the survival of the fittest is the test, these religions prove by their still living
that they are yet fit for some people. There is a reason why they should live,
they bring good to many. Look at the Mohammedans, how they are spreading
in some places in Southern Asia, and spreading like fire in Africa. The
Buddhists are spreading all over Central Asia, all the time. The Hindus, like the
Jews, do not convert others; still gradually, other races are coming within
Hinduism and adopting the manners and customs of the Hindus and falling into

line with them. Christianity, you all know, is spreading — though I am not sure
that the results are equal to the energy put forth. The Christians’ attempt at
propaganda has one tremendous defect — and that is the defect of all Western
institutions: the machine consumes ninety per cent of the energy, there is too
much machinery. Preaching has always been the business of the Asiatics. The
Western people are grand in organisation, social institutions, armies,
governments, etc.; but when it comes to preaching religion, they cannot come
near the Asiatic, whose business it has been all the time, and he knows it, and he
does not use too much machinery.
This then is a fact in the present history of the human race, that all these
great religions exist and are spreading and multiplying. Now, there is a
meaning, certainly, to this; and had it been the will of an All-wise and Allmerciful Creator that one of these religions should exist and the rest should
die, it would have become a fact long, long ago. If it were a fact that only one
of these religions is true and all the rest are false, by this time it would have
covered the whole ground. But this is not so; not one has gained all the ground.
All religions sometimes advance — sometimes decline. Now, just think of this:
in your own country there are more than sixty millions of people, and only
twenty-one millions professing religions of all sorts. So it is not always
progress. In every country, probably, if the statistics are taken, you would find
that religions are sometimes progressing and sometimes going back. Sects are
multiplying all the time. If the claims of a religion that it has all the truth and
God has given it all this truth in a certain book were true, why are there so
many sects? Fifty years do not pass before there are twenty sects founded upon
the same book. If God has put all the truth in certain books, He does not give us
those books in order that we may quarrel over texts. That seems to be the fact.
Why is it? Even if a book were given by God which contained all the truth
about religion, it would not serve the purpose because nobody could
understand the book. Take the Bible, for instance, and all the sects that exist
amongst Christians; each one puts its own interpretation upon the same text,
and each says that it alone understands that text and all the rest are wrong. So
with every religion. There are many sects among the Mohammedans and
among the Buddhists, and hundreds among the Hindus. Now, I bring these facts
before you in order to show you that any attempt to bring all humanity to one
method of thinking in spiritual things has been a failure and always will be a
failure. Every man that starts a theory, even at the present day, finds that if he
goes twenty miles away from his followers, they will make twenty sects. You

see that happening all the time. You cannot make all conform to the same ideas:
that is a fact, and I thank God that it is so. I am not against any sect. I am glad
that sects exist, and I only wish they may go on multiplying more and more.
Why? Simply because of this: If you and I and all who are present here were to
think exactly the same thoughts, there would be no thoughts for us to think. We
know that two or more forces must come into collision in order to produce
motion. It is the clash of thought, the differentiation of thought, that awakes
thought. Now, if we all thought alike, we would be like Egyptian mummies in a
museum looking vacantly at one another ’s faces — no more than that! Whirls
and eddies occur only in a rushing, living stream. There are no whirlpools in
stagnant, dead water. When religions are dead, there will be no more sects; it
will be the perfect peace and harmony of the grave. But so long as mankind
thinks, there will be sects. Variation is the sign of life, and it must be there. I
pray that they may multiply so that at last there will be as many sects as human
beings, and each one will have his own method, his individual method of
thought in religion.
But this thing exists already. Each one of us is thinking in his own way, but
his natural course has been obstructed all the time and is still being obstructed.
If the sword is not used directly, other means will be used. Just hear what one
of the best preachers in New York says: he preaches that the Filipinos should be
conquered because that is the only way to teach Christianity to them! They are
already Catholics; but he wants to make them Presbyterians, and for this, he is
ready to lay all this terrible sin of bloodshed upon his race. How terrible! And
this man is one of the greatest preachers of this country, one of the best
informed men. Think of the state of the world when a man like that is not
ashamed to stand up and utter such arrant nonsense; and think of the state of the
world when an audience cheers him! Is this civilisation? It is the old bloodthirstiness of the tiger, the cannibal, the savage, coming out once more under
new names, new circumstances. What else can it be? If the state of things is
such now, think of the horrors through which the world passed in olden times,
when every sect was trying by every means in its power to tear to pieces the
other sects. History shows that. The tiger in us is only asleep; it is not dead.
When opportunities come, it jumps up and, as of old, uses its claws and fangs.
Apart from the sword, apart from material weapons, there are weapons still
more terrible — contempt, social hatred, and social ostracism. Now, these are
the most terrible of all inflictions that are hurled against persons who do not
think exactly in the same way as we do. And why should everybody think just

as we do? I do not see any reason. If I am a rational man, I should be glad they
do not think just as I do. I do not want to live in a grave-like land; I want to be a
man in a world of men. Thinking beings must differ; difference is the first sign
of thought. If I am a thoughtful man, certainly I ought to like to live amongst
thoughtful persons where there are differences of opinion.
Then arises the question: How can all these varieties be true? If one thing is
true, its negation is false. How can contradictory opinions be true at the same
time? This is the question which I intend to answer. But I will first ask you: Are
all the religions of the world really contradictory? I do not mean the external
forms in which great thoughts are clad. I do not mean the different buildings,
languages, rituals, books, etc. employed in various religions, but I mean the
internal soul of every religion. Every religion has a soul behind it, and that
soul may differ from the soul of another religion; but are they contradictory?
Do they contradict or supplement each other? — that is the question. I took up
the question when I was quite a boy, and have been studying it all my life.
Thinking that my conclusion may be of some help to you, I place it before you.
I believe that they are not contradictory; they are supplementary. Each religion,
as it were, takes up one part of the great universal truth, and spends its whole
force in embodying and typifying that part of the great truth. It is, therefore,
addition; not exclusion. That is the idea. System after system arises, each one
embodying a great idea, and ideals must be added to ideals. And this is the
march of humanity. Man never progresses from error to truth, but from truth
to truth, from lesser truth to higher truth — but it is never from error to truth.
The child may develop more than the father, but was the father inane? The
child is the father plus something else. If your present state of knowledge is
much greater than it was when you were a child, would you look down upon
that stage now? Will you look back and call it inanity? Why, your present stage
is the knowledge of the child plus something more.
Then, again, we also know that there may be almost contradictory points of
view of the same thing, but they will all indicate the same thing. Suppose a man
is journeying towards the sun, and as he advances he takes a photograph of the
sun at every stage. When he comes back, he has many photographs of the sun,
which he places before us. We see that not two are alike, and yet, who will deny
that all these are photographs of the same sun, from different standpoints?
Take four photographs of this church from different corners: how different
they would look, and yet they would all represent this church. In the same way,
we are all looking at truth from different standpoints, which vary according to

our birth, education, surroundings, and so on. We are viewing truth, getting as
much of it as these circumstances will permit, colouring the truth with our own
heart, understanding it with our own intellect, and grasping it with our own
mind. We can only know as much of truth as is related to us, as much of it as
we are able to receive. This makes the difference between man and man, and
occasions sometimes even contradictory ideas; yet we all belong to the same
great universal truth.
My idea, therefore, is that all these religions are different forces in the
economy of God, working for the good of mankind; and that not one can
become dead, not one can be killed. Just as you cannot kill any force in nature,
so you cannot kill any one of these spiritual forces. You have seen that each
religion is living. From time to time it may retrograde or go forward. At one
time, it may be shorn of a good many of its trappings; at another time it may be
covered with all sorts of trappings; but all the same, the soul is ever there, it
can never be lost. The ideal which every religion represents is never lost, and
so every religion is intelligently on the march.
And that universal religion about which philosophers and others have
dreamed in every country already exists. It is here. As the universal
brotherhood of man is already existing, so also is universal religion. Which of
you, that have travelled far and wide, have not found brothers and sisters in
every nation? I have found them all over the world. Brotherhood already
exists; only there are numbers of persons who fail to see this and only upset it
by crying for new brotherhoods. Universal religion, too, is already existing. If
the priests and other people that have taken upon themselves the task of
preaching different religions simply cease preaching for a few moments, we
shall see it is there. They are disturbing it all the time, because it is to their
interest. You see that priests in every country are very conservative. Why is it
so? There are very few priests who lead the people; most of them are led by the
people and are their slaves and servants. If you say it is dry, they say it is so; if
you say it is black, they say it is black. If the people advance, the priests must
advance. They cannot lag behind. So, before blaming the priests — it is the
fashion to blame the priest — you ought to blame yourselves. You only get
what you deserve. What would be the fate of a priest who wants to give you
new and advanced ideas and lead you forward? His children would probably
starve, and he would be clad in rags. He is governed by the same worldly laws
as you are. “If you go on,” he says, “let us march.” Of course, there are
exceptional souls, not cowed down by public opinion. They see the truth and

truth alone they value. Truth has got hold of them, has got possession of them,
as it were, and they cannot but march ahead. They never look backward, and
for them there are no people. God alone exists for them, He is the Light before
them, and they are following that Light.
I met a Mormon gentleman in this country, who tried to persuade me to his
faith. I said, “I have great respect for your opinions, but in certain points we do
not agree — I belong to a monastic order, and you believe in marrying many
wives. But why don’t you go to India to preach?” Then he was astonished. He
said, “Why, you don’t believe in any marriage at all, and we believe in
polygamy, and yet you ask me to go to your country!” I said, “Yes; my
countrymen will hear every religious thought wherever it may come from. I
wish you would go to India, first, because I am a great believer in sects.
Secondly, there are many men in India who are not at all satisfied with any of
the existing sects, and on account of this dissatisfaction, they will not have
anything to do with religion, and, possibly, you might get some of them.” The
greater the number of sects, the more chance of people getting religion. In the
hotel, where there are all sorts of food, everyone has a chance to get his
appetite satisfied. So I want sects to multiply in every country, that more people
may have a chance to be spiritual. Do not think that people do not like religion.
I do not believe that. The preachers cannot give them what they need. The same
man that may have been branded as an atheist, as a materialist, or what not, may
meet a man who gives him the truth needed by him, and he may turn out the
most spiritual man in the community. We can eat only in our own way. For
instance, we Hindus eat with our fingers. Our fingers are suppler than yours,
you cannot use your fingers the same way. Not only the food should be
supplied, but it should be taken in your own particular way. Not only must you
have the spiritual ideas, but they must come to you according to your own
method. They must speak your own language, the language of your soul, and
then alone they will satisfy you. When the man comes who speaks my language
and gives truth in my language, I at once understand it and receive it for ever.
This is a great fact.
Now from this we see that there are various grades and types of human
minds and what a task religions take upon them! A man brings forth two or
three doctrines and claims that his religion ought to satisfy all humanity. He
goes out into the world, God’s menagerie, with a little cage in hand, and says,
“God and the elephant and everybody has to go into this. Even if we have to cut
the elephant into pieces, he must go in.” Again, there may be a sect with a few

good ideas. Its followers say, “All men must come in! ” “But there is no room
for them.” “Never mind! Cut them to pieces; get them in anyhow; if they don’t
get in, why, they will be damned.” No preacher, no sect, have I ever met that
pauses and asks, “Why is it that people do not listen to us?” Instead, they curse
the people and say, “The people are wicked.” They never ask, “How is it that
people do not listen to my words? Why cannot I make them see the truth? Why
cannot I speak in their language? Why cannot I open their eyes?” Surely, they
ought to know better, and when they find people do not listen to them, if they
curse anybody, it should be themselves. But it is always the people’s fault! They
never try to make their sect large enough to embrace every one.
Therefore we at once see why there has been so much narrow-mindedness,
the part always claiming to be the whole; the little, finite unit always laying
claim to the infinite. Think of little sects, born within a few hundred years out
of fallible human brains, making this arrogant claim of knowledge of the
whole of God’s infinite truth! Think of the arrogance of it! If it shows
anything, it is this, how vain human beings are. And it is no wonder that such
claims have always failed, and, by the mercy of the Lord, are always destined
to fail. In this line the Mohammedans were the best off; every step forward was
made with the sword — the Koran in the one hand and the sword in the other:
“Take the Koran, or you must die; there is no alternative! ” You know from
history how phenomenal was their success; for six hundred years nothing
could resist them, and then there came a time when they had to cry halt. So will
it be with other religions if they follow the same methods. We are such babes!
We always forget human nature. When we begin life, we think that our fate will
be something extraordinary, and nothing can make us disbelieve that. But when
we grow old, we think differently. So with religions. In their early stages, when
they spread a. little, they get the idea that they can change the minds of the
whole human race in a few years, and go on killing and massacring to make
converts by force; then they fail, and begin to understand better. We see that
these sects did not succeed in what they started out to do, which was a great
blessing. Just think if one of those fanatical sects had succeeded all over the
world, where would man be today? Now, the Lord be blessed that they did not
succeed! Yet, each one represents a great truth; each religion represents a
particular excellence — something which is its soul. There is an old story
which comes to my mind: There were some ogresses who used to kill people
and do all sorts of mischief; but they themselves could not be killed, until
someone found out that their souls were in certain birds, and so long as the

birds were safe nothing could destroy the ogresses. So, each one of us has, as it
were, such a bird, where our soul is; has an ideal, a mission to perform in life.
Every human being is an embodiment of such an ideal, such a mission.
Whatever else you may lose, so long as that ideal is not lost, and that mission
is not hurt, nothing can kill you. Wealth may come and go, misfortunes may
pile mountains high, but if you have kept the ideal entire, nothing can kill you.
You may have grown old, even a hundred years old, but if that mission is fresh
and young in your heart, what can kill you? But when that ideal is lost and that
mission is hurt, nothing can save you. All the wealth, all the power of the world
will not save you. And what are nations but multiplied individuals? So, each
nation has a mission of its own to perform in this harmony of races; and so
long as that nation keeps to that ideal, that nation nothing can kill; but if that
nation gives up its mission in life and goes after something else, its life
becomes short, and it vanishes.
And so with religions. The fact that all these old religions are living today
proves that they must have kept that mission intact; in spite of all their mistakes,
in spite of all difficulties, in spite of all quarrels, in spite of all the incrustation
of forms and figures, the heart of every one of them is sound — it is a
throbbing, beating, living heart. They have not lost, any one of them, the great
mission they came for. And it is splendid to study that mission. Take
Mohammedanism, for instance. Christian people hate no religion in the world
so much as Mohammedanism. They think it is the very worst form of religion
that ever existed. As soon as a man becomes a Mohammedan, the whole of
Islam receives him as a brother with open arms, without making any
distinction, which no other religion does. If one of your American Indians
becomes a Mohammedan, the Sultan of Turkey would have no objection to
dine with him. If he has brains, no position is barred to him. In this country, I
have never yet seen a church where the white man and the negro can kneel side
by side to pray. Just think of that: Islam makes its followers all equal — so,
that, you see, is the peculiar excellence of Mohammedanism. In many places in
the Koran you find very sensual ideas of life. Never mind. What
Mohammedanism comes to preach to the world is this practical brotherhood of
all belonging to their faith. That is the essential part of the Mohammedan
religion; and all the other ideas about heaven and of life etc.. are not
Mohammedanism. They are accretions.
With the Hindus you will find one national idea — spirituality. In no other
religion, in no other sacred books of the world, will you find so much energy

spent in defining the idea of God. They tried to define the ideal of soul so that
no earthly touch might mar it. The spirit must be divine; and spirit understood
as spirit must not be made into a man. The same idea of unity, of the realisation
of God, the omnipresent, is preached throughout. They think it is all nonsense
to say that He lives in heaven, and all that. It is a mere human, anthropomorphic
idea. All the heaven that ever existed is now and here. One moment in infinite
time is quite as good as any other moment. If you believe in a God, you can see
Him even now. We think religion begins when you have realised something. It
is not believing in doctrines, nor giving intellectual assent, nor making
declarations. If there is a God, have you seen Him? If you say “no”, then what
right have you to believe in Him? If you are in doubt whether there is a God,
why do you not struggle to see Him? Why do you not renounce the world and
spend the whole of your life for this one object? Renunciation and spirituality
are the two great ideas of India, and it is because India clings to these ideas that
all her mistakes count for so little.
With the Christians, the central idea that has been preached by them is the
same: “Watch and pray, for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand” — which
means, purify your minds and be ready! And that spirit never dies. You
recollect that the Christians are, even in the darkest days, even in the most
superstitious Christian countries, always trying to prepare themselves for the
coming of the Lord, by trying to help others, building hospitals, and so on. So
long as the Christians keep to that ideal, their religion lives.
Now an ideal presents itself to my mind. It may be only a dream. I do not
know whether it will ever be realised in this world, but sometimes it is better to
dream a dream, than die on hard facts. Great truths, even in a dream are good,
better than bad facts. So, let us dream a dream.
You know that there are various grades of mind. You may be a matter-offact, common-sense rationalist: you do not care for forms and ceremonies;
you want intellectual, hard, ringing facts, and they alone will satisfy you. Then
there are the Puritans, the Mohammedans, who will not allow a picture or a
statue in their place of worship. Very well! But there is another man who is
more artistic. He wants a great deal of art — beauty of lines and curves, the
colours, flowers, forms; he wants candles, lights, and all the insignia and
paraphernalia of ritual, that he may see God. His mind takes God in those
forms, as yours takes Him through the intellect. Then, there is the devotional
man, whose soul is crying for God: he has no other idea but to worship God,
and to praise Him. Then again, there is the philosopher, standing outside all

these, mocking at them. He thinks, “What nonsense they are! What ideas about
God!”
They may laugh at one another, but each one has a place in this world. All
these various minds, all these various types are necessary. If there ever is
going to be an ideal religion, it must be broad and large enough to supply food
for all these minds. It must supply the strength of philosophy to the
philosopher, the devotee’s heart to the worshipper; to the ritualist, it will give
all that the most marvellous symbolism can convey; to the poet, it will give as
much of heart as he can take in, and other things besides. To make such a broad
religion, we shall have to go back to the time when religions began and take
them all in.
Our watchword, then, will be acceptance, and not exclusion. Not only
toleration, for so-called toleration is often blasphemy, and I do not believe in
it. I believe in acceptance. Why should I tolerate? Toleration means that I think
that you are wrong and I am just allowing you to live. Is it not a blasphemy to
think that you and I are allowing others to live? I accept all religions that were
in the past, and worship with them all; I worship God with every one of them,
in whatever form they worship Him. I shall go to the mosque of the
Mohammedan; I shall enter the Christian’s church and kneel before the
crucifix; I shall enter the Buddhistic temple, where I shall take refuge in
Buddha and in his Law. I shall go into the forest and sit down in meditation
with the Hindu, who is trying to see the Light which enlightens the heart of
every one.
Not only shall I do all these, but I shall keep my heart open for all that may
come in the future. Is God’s book finished? Or is it still a continuous revelation
going on? It is a marvellous book — these spiritual revelations of the world.
The Bible, the Vedas, the Koran, and all other sacred books are but so many
pages, and an infinite number of pages remain yet to be unfolded. I would
leave it open for all of them. We stand in the present, but open ourselves to the
infinite future. We take in all that has been in the past, enjoy the light of the
present, and open every window of the heart for all that will come in the future.
Salutation to all the prophets of the past, to all the great ones of the present, and
to all that are to come in the future!
The Ideal Of A Universal Religion
HOW IT MUST EMBRACE DIFFERENT T YPES OF MINDS AND METHODS

Wheresoever our senses reach, or whatsoever our minds imagine, we find
therein the action and reaction of two forces, the one counteracting the other
and causing the constant play of the mixed phenomena that we see around us,
and of those which we feel in our minds. In the external world, the action of
these opposite forces is expressing itself as attraction and repulsion, or as
centripetal and centrifugal forces; and in the internal, as love and hatred, good
and evil. We repel some things, we attract others. We are attracted by one, we
are repelled by another. Many times in our lives we find that without any
reason whatsoever we are, as it were, attracted towards certain persons; at
other times, similarly, we are repelled by others. This is patent to all, and the
higher the field of action, the more potent, the more remarkable, are the
influences of these opposite forces. Religion is the highest plane of human
thought and life, and herein we find that the workings of these two forces have
been most marked. The intensest love that humanity has ever known has come
from religion, and the most diabolical hatred that humanity has known has also
come from religion. The noblest words of peace that the world has ever heard
have come from men on the religious plane, and the bitterest denunciation that
the world has ever known has been uttered by religious men. The higher the
object of any religion and the finer its organisation, he more remarkable are
its activities. No other human motive has deluged the world with blood so
much as religion; at the same time, nothing has brought into existence so many
hospitals and asylums for the poor; no other human influence has taken such
care, not only of humanity, but also of the lowest of animals, as religion has
done. Nothing makes us so cruel as religion, and nothing makes us so tender as
religion. This has been so in the past, and will also, in all probability, be so in
the future. Yet out of the midst of this din and turmoil, this strife and struggle,
this hatred and jealousy of religions and sects, there have arisen, from time to
time, potent voices, drowning all this noise — making themselves heard from
pole to pole, as it were — proclaiming peace and harmony. Will it ever come?
Is it possible that there should ever reign unbroken harmony in this plane of
mighty religious struggle. The world is exercised in the latter part of this
century by the question of harmony; in society, various plans are being
proposed, and attempts are made to carry them into practice; but we know how
difficult it is to do so. People find that it is almost impossible to mitigate the
fury of the struggle of life, to tone down the tremendous nervous tension that is
in man. Now, if it is so difficult to bring harmony and peace to the physical
plane of life — the external, gross, and outward side of it — then a thousand

times more difficult is it to bring peace and harmony to rule over the internal
nature of man. I would ask you for the time being to come out of the network
of words. We have all been hearing from childhood of such things as love,
peace, charity, equality, and universal brotherhood; but they have become to us
mere words without meaning, words which we repeat like parrots, and it has
become quite natural for us to do so. We cannot help it. Great souls, who first
felt these great ideas in their hearts, manufactured these words; and at that time
many understood their meaning. Later on, ignorant people have taken up those
words to play with them and made religion a mere play upon words, and not a
thing to be carried into practice. It becomes “my father ’s religion”, “our
nation’s religion”, “our country’s religion”, and so forth. It becomes only a
phase of patriotism to profess any religion, and patriotism is always partial. To
bring harmony into religion must always be difficult. Yet we will consider this
problem of the harmony of religions.
We see that in every religion there are three parts — I mean in every great
and recognised religion. First, there is the philosophy which presents the whole
scope of that religion, setting forth its basic principles, the goal and the means
of reaching it. The second part is mythology, which is philosophy made
concrete. It consists of legends relating to the lives of men, or of supernatural
beings, and so forth. It is the abstractions of philosophy concretised in the
more or less imaginary lives of men and supernatural beings. The third part is
the ritual. This is still more concrete and is made up of forms and ceremonies,
various physical attitudes, flowers and incense, and many other things, that
appeal to the senses. In these consists the ritual. You will find that all
recognised religions have these three elements. Some lay more stress on one,
some on another. Let us now take into consideration the first part, philosophy.
Is there one universal philosophy? Not yet. Each religion brings out its own
doctrines and insists upon them as being the only true ones. And not only does
it do that, but it thinks that he who does not believe in them must go to some
horrible place. Some will even draw the sword to compel others to believe as
they do. This is not through wickedness, but through a particular disease of the
human brain called fanaticism. They are very sincere, these fanatics, the most
sincere of human beings; but they are quite as irresponsible as other lunatics in
the world. This disease of fanaticism is one of the most dangerous of all
diseases. All the wickedness of human nature is roused by it. Anger is stirred
up, nerves are strung high, and human beings become like tigers.
Is there any mythological similarity, is there any mythological harmony,

any universal mythology accepted by all religions? Certainly not. All religions
have their own mythology, only each of them says, “My stories are not mere
myths.” Let us try to understand the question by illustration. I simply mean to
illustrate, I do not mean criticism of any religion. The Christian believes that
God took the shape of a dove and came down to earth; to him this is history,
and not mythology. The Hindu believes that God is manifested in the cow.
Christians say that to believe so is mere mythology, and not history, that it is
superstition. The Jews think that if an image be made in the form of a box, or a
chest, with an angel on either side, then it may be placed in the Holy of Holies;
it is sacred to Jehovah; but if the image be made in the form of a beautiful man
or woman, they say, “This is a horrible idol; break it down! ” This is our unity
in mythology! If a man stands up and says, “My prophet did such and such a
wonderful thing”, others will say, “That is only superstition”, but at the same
time they say that their own prophet did still more wonderful things, which
they hold to be historical. Nobody in the world, as far as I have seen, is able to
make out the fine distinction between history and mythology, as it exists in the
brains of these persons. All such stories, to whatever religion they may belong,
are really mythological, mixed up occasionally, it may be with, a little history.
Next come the rituals. One sect has one particular form of ritual and thinks
that that is holy, while the rituals of another sect are simply arrant superstition.
If one sect worships a peculiar sort of symbol, another sect says, “Oh, it is
horrible!” Take, for instance, a general form of symbol. The phallus symbol is
certainly a sexual symbol, but gradually that aspect of it has been forgotten,
and it stands now as a symbol of the Creator. Those nations which have this as
their symbol never think of it as the phallus; it is just a symbol, and there it
ends. But a man from another race or creed sees in it nothing but the phallus,
and begins to condemn it; yet at the same time he may be doing something
which to the so-called phallic worshippers appears most horrible. Let me take
two points for illustration, the phallus symbol and the sacrament of the
Christians. To the Christians the phallus is horrible, and to the Hindus the
Christian sacrament is horrible. They say that the Christian sacrament, the
killing of a man and the eating of his flesh and the drinking of his blood to get
the good qualities of that man, is cannibalism. This is what some of the savage
tribes do; if a man is brave, they kill him and eat his heart, because they think
that it will give them the qualities of courage and bravery possessed by that
man. Even such a devout Christian as Sir John Lubbock admits this and says
that the origin of this Christian symbol is in this savage idea. The Christians, of

course, do not admit this view of its origin; and what it may imply never comes
to their mind. It stands for holy things, and that is all they want to know. So
even in rituals there is no universal symbol, which can command general
recognition and acceptance. Where then is any universality? How is it possible
then to have a universal form of religion? That, however, already exists. And
let us see what it is.
We all hear about universal brotherhood, and how societies stand up
especially to preach this. I remember an old story. In India, taking wine is
considered very bad. There were two brothers who wished, one night, to drink
wine secretly; and their uncle, who was a very orthodox man was sleeping in a
room quite close to theirs. So, before they began to drink, they said to each
other, “We must be very silent, or uncle will wake up.” When they were
drinking, they continued repeating to each other “Silence! Uncle will wake up”,
each trying to shout the other down. And, as the shouting increased, the uncle
woke up, came into the room, and discovered the whole thing. Now, we all
shout like these drunken men,” Universal brotherhood! We are all equal,
therefore let us make a sect.” As soon as you make a sect you protest against
equality, and equality is no more. Mohammedans talk of universal
brotherhood, but what comes out of that in reality? Why, anybody who is not a
Mohammedan will not be admitted into the brotherhood; he will more likely
have his throat cut. Christians talk of universal brotherhood; but anyone who is
not a Christian must go to that place where he will be eternally barbecued.
And so we go on in this world in our search after universal brotherhood and
equality. When you hear such talk in the world, I would ask you to be a little
reticent, to take care of yourselves, for, behind all this talk is often the intensest
selfishness. “In the winter sometimes a thunder-cloud comes up; it roars and
roars, but it does not rain; but in the rainy season the clouds speak not, but
deluge the world with water.” So those who are really workers, and really feel
at heart the universal brotherhood of man, do not talk much, do not make little
sects for universal brotherhood; but their acts, their movements, their whole
life, show out clearly that they in truth possess the feeling of brotherhood for
mankind, that they have love and sympathy for all. They do not speak, they do
and they live. This world is too full of blustering talk. We want a little more
earnest work, and less talk.
So far we see that it is hard to find any universal features in regard to
religion, and yet we know that they exist. We are all human beings, but are we
all equal? Certainly not. Who says we are equal? Only the lunatic. Are we all

equal in our brains, in our powers, in our bodies? One man is stronger than
another, one man has more brain power than another. If we are all equal, why
is there this inequality? Who made it? We. Because we have more or less
powers, more or less brain, more or less physical strength, it must make a
difference between us. Yet we know that the doctrine of equality appeals to our
heart. We are all human beings; but some are men, and some are women. Here
is a black man, there is a white man; but all are men, all belong to one
humanity. Various are our faces; I see no two alike, yet we are all human
beings. Where is this one humanity? I find a man or a woman, either dark or
fair; and among all these faces I know that there is an abstract humanity which
is common to all. I may not find it when I try to grasp it, to sense it, and to
actualise it, yet I know for certain that it is there. If I am sure of anything, it is
of this humanity which is common to us all. It is through this generalised entity
that I see you as a man or a woman. So it is with this universal religion, which
runs through all the various religions of the world in the form of God; it must
and does exist through eternity. “I am the thread that runs through all these
pearls,” and each pearl is a religion or even a sect thereof. Such are the
different pearls, and the Lord is the thread that runs through all of them; only
the majority of mankind are entirely unconscious of it.
Unity in variety is the plan of the universe. We are all men, and yet we are all
distinct from one another. As a part of humanity I am one with you, and as Mr.
So-and-so I am different from you. As a man you are separate from the
woman; as a human being you are one with the woman. As a man you are
separate from the animal, but as living beings, man, woman, animal, and plant
are all one; and as existence, you are one with the whole universe. That
universal existence is God, the ultimate Unity in the universe. In Him we are all
one. At the same time, in manifestation, these differences must always remain.
In our work, in our energies, as they are being manifested outside, these
differences must always remain. We find then that if by the idea of a universal
religion it is meant that one set of doctrines should be believed in by all
mankind it is wholly impossible. It can never be, there can never be a time
when all faces will be the same. Again, if we expect that there will be one
universal mythology, that is also impossible; it cannot be. Neither can there be
one universal ritual. Such a state of things can never come into existence; if it
ever did, the world would be destroyed, because variety is the first principle of
life. What makes us formed beings? Differentiation. Perfect balance would be
our destruction. Suppose the amount of heat in this room, the tendency of

which is towards equal and perfect diffusion, gets that kind of diffusion, then
for all practical purposes that heat will cease to be. What makes motion
possible in this universe? Lost balance. The unity of sameness can come only
when this universe is destroyed, otherwise such a thing is impossible. Not only
so, it would be dangerous to have it. We must not wish that all of us should
think alike. There would then be no thought to think. We should be all alike, as
the Egyptian mummies in a museum, looking at each other without a thought to
think. It is this difference, this differentiation, this losing of the balance
between us, which is the very soul of our progress, the soul of all our thought.
This must always be.
What then do I mean by the ideal of a universal religion? I do not mean any
one universal philosophy, or any one universal mythology, or any one
universal ritual held alike by all; for I know that this world must go on
working, wheel within wheel, this intricate mass of machinery, most complex,
most wonderful. What can we do then? We can make it run smoothly, we can
lessen the friction, we can grease the wheels, as it were. How? By recognising
the natural necessity of variation. Just as we have recognised unity by our very
nature, so we must also recognise variation. We must learn that truth may be
expressed in a hundred thousand ways, and that each of these ways is true as far
as it goes. We must learn that the same thing can be viewed from a hundred
different standpoints, and vet be the same thing. Take for instance the sun.
Suppose a man standing on the earth looks at the sun when it rises in the
morning; he sees a big ball. Suppose he starts on a journey towards the sun and
takes a camera with him, taking photographs at every stage of his journey, until
he reaches the sun. The photographs of each stage will be seen to be different
from those of the other stages; in fact, when he gets back, he brings with him
so many photographs of so many different suns, as it would appear; and yet we
know that the same sun was photographed by the man at the different stages of
his progress. Even so is it with the Lord. Through high philosophy or low,
through the most exalted mythology or the grossest, through the most refined
ritualism or arrant fetishism, every sect, every soul, every nation, every
religion, consciously or unconsciously, is struggling upward, towards God;
every vision of truth that man has, is a vision of Him and of none else. Suppose
we all go with vessels in our hands to fetch water from a lake. One has a cup,
another a jar, another a bucket, and so forth, and we all fill our vessels. The
water in each case naturally takes the form of the vessel carried by each of us.
He who brought the cup has the water in the form of a cup; he who brought the

jar — his water is in the shape of a jar, and so forth; but, in every case, water,
and nothing but water, is in the vessel. So it is in the case of religion; our minds
are like these vessels, and each one of us is trying to arrive at the realisation of
God. God is like that water filling these different vessels, and in each vessel the
vision of God comes in the form of the vessel. Yet He is One. He is God in
every case. This is the only recognition of universality that we can get.
So far it is all right theoretically. But is there any way of practically working
out this harmony in religions? We find that this recognition that all the various
views of religion are true has been very very old. Hundreds of attempts have
been made in India, in Alexandria, in Europe, in China, in Japan, in Tibet, and
lastly in America, to formulate a harmonious religious creed, to make all
religions come together in love. They have all failed, because they did not
adopt any practical plan. Many have admitted that all the religions of the world
are right, but they show no practical way of bringing them together, so as to
enable each of them to maintain its own individuality in the conflux. That plan
alone is practical, which does not destroy the individuality of any man in
religion and at the same time shows him a point of union with all others. But so
far, all the plans of religious harmony that have been tried, while proposing to
take in all the various views of religion, have, in practice, tried to bind them all
down to a few doctrines, and so have produced more new sects, fighting,
struggling, and pushing against each other.
I have also my little plan. I do not know whether it will work or not, and I
want to present it to you for discussion. What is my plan? In the first place I
would ask mankind to recognise this maxim, “Do not destroy”. Iconoclastic
reformers do no good to the world. Break not, pull not anything down, but
build. Help, if you can; if you cannot, fold your hands and stand by and see
things go on. Do not injure, if you cannot render help. Say not a word against
any man’s convictions so far as they are sincere. Secondly, take man where he
stands, and from there give him a lift. If it be true that God is the centre of all
religions, and that each of us is moving towards Him along one of these radii,
then it is certain that all of us must reach that centre. And at the centre, where all
the radii meet, all our differences will cease; but until we reach there,
differences there must be. All these radii converge to the same centre. One,
according to his nature, travels along one of these lines, and another, along
another; and if we all push onward along our own lines, we shall surely come
to the centre, because, “All roads lead to Rome”. Each of us is naturally
growing and developing according to his own nature; each will in time come

to know the highest truth for after all, men must teach themselves. What can
you and I do? Do you think you can teach even a child? You cannot. The child
teaches himself. Your duty is to afford opportunities and to remove obstacles.
A plant grows. Do you make the plant grow? Your duty is to put a hedge round
it and see that no animal eats up the plant, and there your duty ends. The plant
grows of itself. So it is in regard to the spiritual growth of every man. None
can teach you; none can make a spiritual man of you. You have to teach
yourself; your growth must come from inside.
What can an external teacher do? He can remove the obstructions a little,
and there his duty ends. Therefore help, if you can; but do not destroy. Give up
all ideas that you can make men spiritual. It is impossible. There is no other
teacher to you than your own soul. Recognise this. What comes of it? In society
we see so many different natures. There are thousands and thousands of
varieties of minds and inclinations. A thorough generalisation of them is
impossible, but for our practical purpose it is sufficient to have them
characterised into four classes. First, there is the active man, the worker; he
wants to work, and there is tremendous energy in his muscles and his nerves.
His aim is to work — to build hospitals, do charitable deeds, make streets, to
plan and to organise. Then there is the emotional man who loves the sublime
and the beautiful to an excessive degree. He loves to think of the beautiful, to
enjoy the aesthetic side of nature, and adore Love and the God of Love. He
loves with his whole heart the great souls of all times, the prophets of
religions, and the Incarnations of God on earth; he does not care whether
reason can or cannot prove that Christ or Buddha existed; he does not care for
the exact date when the Sermon on the Mount was preached, or for the exact
moment of Krishna’s birth; what he cares for is their personalities, their
lovable figures. Such is his ideal. This is the nature of the lover, the emotional
man. Then, there is the mystic whose mind wants to analyse its own self, to
understand the workings of the human mind, what the forces are that are
working inside, and how to know, manipulate, and obtain control over them.
This is the mystical mind. Then, there is the philosopher who wants to weigh
everything and use his intellect even beyond the possibilities of all human
philosophy.
Now a religion, to satisfy the largest proportion of mankind, must be able to
supply food for all these various types of minds; and where this capability is
wanting, the existing sects all become one-sided. Suppose you go to a sect
which preaches love and emotion. They sing and weep, and preach love. But as

soon as you say, “My friend, that is all right, but I want something stronger
than this — a little reason and philosophy; I want to understand things step by
step and more rationally”, they say, “Get out”; and they not only ask you to get
out but would send you to the other place, if they could. The result is that that
sect can only help people of an emotional turn of mind. They not only do not
help others, but try to destroy them; and the most wicked part of the whole
thing is that they will not only not help others, but do not believe in their
sincerity. Again, there are philosophers who talk of the wisdom of India and
the East and use big psychological terms, fifty syllables long, but if an
ordinary man like me goes to them and says, “Can you tell me anything to
make me spiritual?”, the first thing they would do would be to smile and say,
“Oh, you are too far below us in your reason. What can you understand about
spirituality?” These are high-up philosophers. They simply show you the door.
Then there are the mystical sects who speak all sorts of things about different
planes of existence, different states of mind, and what the power of the mind
can do, and so on; and if you are an ordinary man and say, “Show me anything
good that I can do; I am not much given to speculation; can you give me
anything that will suit me?”, they will smile and say, “Listen to that fool; he
knows nothing, his existence is for nothing.” And this is going on everywhere
in the world. I would like to get extreme exponents of all these different sects,
and shut them up in a room, and photograph their beautiful derisive smiles!
This is the existing condition of religion, the existing condition of things.
What I want to propagate is a religion that will be equally acceptable to all
minds; it must be equally philosophic, equally emotional, equally mystic, and
equally conducive to action. If professors from the colleges come, scientific
men and physicists, they will court reason. Let them have it as much as they
want. There will be a point beyond which they will think they cannot go,
without breaking with reason. They will say, “These ideas of God and salvation
are superstitious, guise them up! ” I say, “Mr. Philosopher, this body of yours
is a bigger superstition. Give it up, don’t go home to dinner or to your
philosophic chair. Give up the body, and if you cannot, cry quarter and sit
down.” For religion must be able to show how to realise the philosophy that
teaches us that this world is one, that there is but one Existence in the universe.
Similarly, if the mystic comes, we must welcome him, be ready to give him the
science of mental analysis, and practically demonstrate it before him. And if
emotional people come, we must sit, laugh, and weep with them in the name of
the Lord; we must “drink the cup of love and become mad”. If the energetic

worker comes, we must work with him, with all the energy that we have. And
this combination will be the ideal of the nearest approach to a universal
religion. Would to God that all men were so constituted that in their minds all
these elements of philosophy, mysticism, emotion, and of work were equally
present in full! That is the ideal, my ideal of a perfect man. Everyone who has
only one or two of these elements of character, I consider “one-sided”; and this
world is almost full of such “one-sided” men, with knowledge of that one road
only in which they move; and anything else is dangerous and horrible to them.
To become harmoniously balanced in all these four directions is my ideal of
religion. And this religion is attained by what we, in India, call Yoga — union.
To the worker, it is union between men and the whole of humanity; to the
mystic, between his lower and Higher Self; to the lover, union between himself
and the God of Love; and to the philosopher; it is the union of all existence.
This is what is meant by Yoga. This is a Sanskrit term, and these four divisions
of Yoga have in Sanskrit different names. The man who seeks after this kind of
union is called a Yogi. The worker is called the Karma-Yogi. He who seeks the
union through love is called the Bhakti-Yogi. He who seeks it through
mysticism is called the Râja-Yogi. And he who seeks it through philosophy is
called the Jnâna-Yogi So this word Yogi comprises them all.
Now first of all let me take up Râja-Yoga. What is this Raja-Yoga, this
controlling of the mind? In this country you are associating all sorts of
hobgoblins with the word Yoga, I am afraid. Therefore, I must start by telling
you that it has nothing to do with such things. No one of these Yogas gives up
reason, no one of them asks you to be hoodwinked, or to deliver your reason
into the hands of priests of any type whatsoever. No one of them asks that you
should give your allegiance to any superhuman messenger. Each one of them
tells you to cling to your reason to hold fast to it. We find in all beings three
sorts of instruments of knowledge. The first is instinct, which you find most
highly developed in animals; this is the lowest instrument of knowledge. What
is the second instrument of knowledge? Reasoning. You find that most highly
developed in man. Now in the first place, instinct is an inadequate instrument;
to animals, the sphere of action is very limited, and within that limit instinct
acts. When you come to man, you see it is largely developed into reason. The
sphere of action also has here become enlarged. Yet even reason is still very
insufficient. Reason can go only a little way and then it stops, it cannot go any
further; and if you try to push it, the result is helpless confusion, reason itself
becomes unreasonable. Logic becomes argument in a circle. Take, for

instance, the very basis of our perception, matter and force. What is matter?
That which is acted upon by force. And force? That which acts upon matter.
You see the complication, what the logicians call see-saw, one idea depending
on the other, and this again depending on that. You find a mighty barrier before
reason, beyond which reasoning cannot go; yet it always feels impatient to get
into the region of the Infinite beyond. This world, this universe which our
senses feel, or our mind thinks, is but one atom, so to say, of the Infinite,
projected on to the plane of consciousness; and within that narrow limit,
defined by the network of consciousness, works our reason, and not beyond.
Therefore, there must be some other instrument to take us beyond, and that
instrument is called inspiration. So instinct, reason, and inspiration are the
three instruments of knowledge. Instinct belongs to animals, reason to man,
and inspiration to God-men. But in all human beings are to be found, in a more
or less developed condition, the germs of all these three instruments of
knowledge. To have these mental instruments evolved, the germs must be there.
And this must also be remembered that one instrument is a development of the
other, and therefore does not contradict it. It is reason that develops into
inspiration, and therefore inspiration does not contradict reason, but fulfils it.
Things which reason cannot get at are brought to light by inspiration; and they
do not contradict reason. The old man does not contradict the child, but fulfils
the child. Therefore you must always bear in mind that the great danger lies in
mistaking the lower form of instrument to be the higher. Many times instinct is
presented before the world as inspiration, and then come all the spurious
claims for the gift of prophecy. A fool or a semi-lunatic thinks that the
confusion going on in his brain is inspiration, and he wants men to follow him.
The most contradictory irrational nonsense that has been preached in the world
is simply the instinctive jargon of confused lunatic brains trying to pass for the
language of inspiration.
The first test of true teaching must be, that the teaching should not contradict
reason. And you may see that such is the basis of all these Yogas. We take the
Raja-Yoga, the psychological Yoga, the psychological way to union. It is a vast
subject, and I can only point out to you now the central idea of this Yoga. We
have but one method of acquiring knowledge. From the lowest man to the
highest Yogi, all have to use the same method; and that method is what is called
concentration. The chemist who works in his laboratory concentrates all the
powers of his mind, brings them into one focus, and throws them on the
elements; and the elements stand analysed, and thus his knowledge comes. The

astronomer has also concentrated the powers of his mind and brought them
into one focus; and he throws them on to objects through his telescope; and
stars and systems roll forward and give up their secrets to him. So it is in every
case — with the professor in his chair, the student with his book — with every
man who is working to know. You are hearing me, and if my words interest
you, your mind will become concentrated on them; and then suppose a clock
strikes, you will not hear it, on account of this concentration; and the more you
are able to concentrate your mind, the better you will understand me; and the
more I concentrate my love and powers, the better I shall be able to give
expression to what I want to convey to you. The more this power of
concentration, the more knowledge is acquired, because this is the one and
only method of acquiring knowledge. Even the lowest shoeblack, if he gives
more concentration, will black shoes better; the cook with concentration will
cook a meal all the better. In making money, or in worshipping God, or in
doing anything, the stronger the power of concentration, the better will that
thing be done. This is the one call, the one knock, which opens the gates of
nature, and lets out floods of light. This, the power of concentration, is the only
key to the treasure-house of knowledge. The system of Raja-Yoga deals almost
exclusively with this. In the present state of our body we are so much
distracted, and the mind is frittering away its energies upon a hundred sorts of
things. As soon as I try to calm my thoughts and concentrate my mind upon any
one object of knowledge, thousands of undesired impulses rush into the brain,
thousands of thoughts rush into the mind and disturb it. How to check it and
bring the mind under control is the whole subject of study in Raja-Yoga.
Now take Karma-Yoga, the attainment of God through work. It is evident
that in society there are many persons who seem to be born for some sort of
activity or other, whose minds cannot be concentrated on the plane of thought
alone, and who have but one idea, concretised in work, visible and tangible.
There must be a science for this kind of life too. Each one of us is engaged in
some work, but the majority of us fritter away the greater portion of our
energies, because we do not know the secret of work. Karma-Yoga explains
this secret and teaches where and how to work, how to employ to the greatest
advantage the largest part of our energies in the work that is before us. But
with this secret we must take into consideration the great objection against
work, namely that it causes pain. All misery and pain come from attachment. I
want to do work, I want to do good to a human being; and it is ninety to one
that that human being whom I have helped will prove ungrateful and go against

me; and the result to me is pain. Such things deter mankind from working; and
it spoils a good portion of the work and energy of mankind, this fear of pain
and misery. Karma-Yoga teaches us how to work for work’s sake, unattached,
without caring who is helped, and what for. The Karma-Yogi works because it
is his nature, because he feels that it is good for him to do so, and he has no
object beyond that. His position in this world is that of a giver, and he never
cares to receive anything. He knows that he is giving, and does not ask for
anything in return and, therefore, he eludes the grasp of misery. The grasp of
pain, whenever it comes, is the result of the reaction of “attachment”.
There is then the Bhakti-Yoga for the man of emotional nature, the lover. He
wants to love God, he relies upon and uses all sorts of rituals, flowers, incense,
beautiful buildings, forms and all such things. Do you mean to say they are
wrong? One fact I must tell you. It is good for you to remember, in this
country especially, that the world’s great spiritual giants have all been
produced only by those religious sects which have been in possession of very
rich mythology and ritual. All sects that have attempted to worship God without
any form or ceremony have crushed without mercy everything that is beautiful
and sublime in religion. Their religion is a fanaticism at best, a dry thing. The
history of the world is a standing witness to this fact. Therefore do not decry
these rituals and mythologies. Let people have them; let those who so desire
have them. Do not exhibit that unworthy derisive smile, and say, “They are
fools; let them have it.” Not so; the greatest men I have seen in my life, the
most wonderfully developed in spirituality, have all come through the
discipline of these rituals. I do not hold myself worthy to sit at their feet, and
for me to criticise them! How do I know how these ideas act upon the human
minds which of them I am to accept and which to reject? We are apt to criticise
everything in the world: without sufficient warrant. Let people have all the
mythology they want, with its beautiful inspirations; for you must always bear
in mind that emotional natures do not care for abstract definitions of the truth.
God to them is something tangible, the only thing that is real; they feel, hear,
and see Him, and love Him. Let them have their God. Your rationalist seems to
them to be like the fool who, when he saw a beautiful statue, wanted to break it
to find out of what material it was made. Bhakti-Yoga: teaches them how to
love, without any ulterior motives, loving God and loving the good because it
is good to do so, not for going to heaven, nor to get children, wealth, or
anything else. It teaches them that love itself is the highest recompense of love -- that God Himself is love. It teaches them to pay all kinds of tribute to God as

the Creator, the Omnipresent, Omniscient, Almighty Ruler, the Father and the
Mother. The highest phrase that can express Him, the highest idea that the
human mind can conceive of Him, is that He is the God of Love. Wherever
there is love, it is He. “Wherever there is any love, it is He, the Lord is present
there.” Where the husband kisses the wife, He is there in the kiss; where the
mother kisses the child, He is there in the kiss; where friends clasp hands, He,
the Lord, is present as the God of Love. When a great man loves and wishes to
help mankind, He is there giving freely His bounty out of His love to mankind.
Wherever the heart expands, He is there manifested. This is what the BhaktiYoga teaches.
We lastly come to the Jnana-Yogi, the philosopher, the thinker, he who wants
to go beyond the visible. He is the man who is not satisfied with the little things
of this world. His idea is to go beyond the daily routine of eating, drinking,
and so on; not even the teaching of thousands of books will satisfy him. Not
even all the sciences will satisfy him; at the best, they only bring this little
world before him. What else will give him satisfaction? Not even myriads of
systems of worlds will satisfy him; they are to him but a drop in the ocean of
existence. His soul wants to go beyond all that into the very heart of being, by
seeing Reality as It is; by realising It, by being It, by becoming one with that
Universal Being. That is the philosopher. To say that God is the Father or the
Mother, the Creator of this universe, its Protector and Guide, is to him quite
inadequate to express Him. To him, God is the life of his life, the soul of his
soul. God is his own Self. Nothing else remains which is other than God. All
the mortal parts of him become pounded by the weighty strokes of philosophy
and are brushed away. What at last truly remains is God Himself.
Upon the same tree there are two birds, one on the top, the other below. The
one on the top is calm, silent, and majestic, immersed in his own glory; the one
on the lower branches, eating sweet and bitter fruits by turns, hopping from
branch to branch, is becoming happy and miserable by turns. After a time the
lower bird eats an exceptionally bitter fruit and gets disgustful and looks up
and sees the other bird, that wondrous one of golden plumage, who eats neither
sweet nor bitter fruit, who is neither happy nor miserable, but calm, Selfcentred, and sees nothing beyond his Self. The lower bird longs for this
condition but soon forgets it, and again begins to eat the fruits. In a little while,
he eats another exceptionally bitter fruit, which makes him feel miserable, and
he again looks up, and tries to get nearer to the upper bird. Once more he
forgets and after a time he looks up, and so on he goes again and again, until

he comes very near to the beautiful bird and sees the reflection of light from
his plumage playing around his own body, and he feels a change and seems to
melt away; still nearer he comes, and everything about him melts away, and at
last he understands this wonderful change. The lower bird was, as it were, only
the substantial-looking shadow, the reflection of the higher; he himself was in
essence the upper bird all the time. This eating of fruits, sweet and bitter, this
lower, little bird, weeping and happy by turns, was a vain chimera, a dream: all
along, the real bird was there above, calm and silent, glorious and majestic,
beyond grief, beyond sorrow. The upper bird is God, the Lord of this universe;
and the lower bird is the human soul, eating the sweet and bitter fruits of this
world. Now and then comes a heavy blow to the soul. For a time, he stops the
eating and goes towards the unknown God, and a flood of light comes. He
thinks that this world is a vain show. Yet again the senses drag hint down, and
he begins as before to eat the sweet and bitter fruits of the world. Again an
exceptionally hard blow comes. His heart becomes open again to divine light;
thus gradually he approaches God, and as he gets nearer and nearer, he finds
his old self melting away. When he has come near enough, he sees that he is no
other than God, and he exclaims, “He whom I have described to you as the Life
of this universe, as present in the atom, and in suns and moons — He is the
basis of our own life, the Soul of our soul. Nay, thou art That.” This is what
this Jnana-Yoga teaches. It tells man that he is essentially divine. It shows to
mankind the real unity of being, and that each one of us is the Lord God
Himself, manifested on earth. All of us, from the lowest worm that crawls
under our feet to the highest beings to whom we look up with wonder and awe
— all are manifestations of the same Lord.
Lastly, it is imperative that all these various Yogas should be carried out in,
practice; mere theories about them will not do any good. First we have to hear
about them, then we have to think about them. We have to reason the thoughts
out, impress them on our minds, and we have to meditate on them, realise
them, until at last they become our whole life. No longer will religion remain a
bundle of ideas or theories, nor an intellectual assent; it will enter into our very
self. By means of intellectual assent we may today subscribe to many foolish
things, and change our minds altogether tomorrow. But true religion never
changes. Religion is realisation; not talk, nor doctrine, nor theories, however
beautiful they may be. It is being and becoming, not hearing or acknowledging;
it is the whole soul becoming changed into what it believes. That is religion.

The Open Secret
(Delivered at Los Angeles, Calif., 5th January 1900)
Whichever way we turn in trying to understand things in their reality, if we
analyse far enough, we find that at last we come to a peculiar state of things,
seemingly a contradiction: something which our reason cannot grasp and yet is
a fact. We take up something — we know it is finite; but as soon as we begin to
analyse it, it leads us beyond our reason, and we never find an end to all its
qualities, its possibilities, its powers, its relations. It has become infinite. Take
even a common flower, that is finite enough; but who is there that can say he
knows all about the flower? There is no possibility of anyone’s getting to the
end of the knowledge about that one flower. The flower has become infinite —
the flower which was finite to begin with. Take a grain of sand. Analyse it. We
start with the assumption that it is finite, and at last we find that it is not, it is
infinite; all the same, we have looked upon it as finite. The flower is similarly
treated as a finite something.
So with all our thoughts and experiences, physical and mental. We begin, we
may think, on a small scale, and grasp them as little things; but very soon they
elude our knowledge and plunge into the abyss of the infinite. And the greatest
and the first thing perceived is ourselves. We are also in the same dilemma
about existence. We exist. We see we are finite beings. We live and die. Our
horizon is narrow. We are here, limited, confronted by the universe all around.
Nature can crush us out of existence in a moment. Our little bodies are just held
together, ready to go to pieces at a moment’s notice. We know that. In the
region of action how powerless we are! Our will is being thwarted at every
turn. So many things we want to do, and how few we can do! There is no limit
to our willing. We can will everything, want everything, we can desire to go to
the dogstar. But how few of our desires can be accomplished! The body will
not allow it. Well, nature is against the accomplishment of our will. We are
weak. What is true of the flower, of the grain of sand, of the physical world,
and of every thought, is a hundredfold more true of ourselves. We are also in
the same dilemma of existence, being finite and infinite at the same time. We
are like waves in the ocean; the wave is the ocean and yet not the ocean. There
is not any part of the wave of which you cannot say, “It is the ocean.” The name
“ocean” applies to the wave and equally to every other part of the ocean, and
yet it is separate from the ocean. So in this infinite ocean of existence we are

like wavelets. At the same time, when we want really to grasp ourselves, we
cannot — we have become the infinite.
We seem to be walking in dreams. Dreams are all right in a dream-mind; but
as soon as you want to grasp one of them, it is gone. Why? Not that it was
false, but because it is beyond the power of reason, the power of the intellect to
comprehend it. Everything in this life is so vast that the intellect is nothing in
comparison with it. It refuses to be bound by the laws of the intellect! It laughs
at the bondage the intellect wants to spread around it. And a thousandfold more
so is this the case with the human soul. “We ourselves” — this is the greatest
mystery of the universe.
How wonderful it all is! Look at the human eye. How easily it can be
destroyed, and yet the biggest suns exist only because your eyes see them. The
world exists because your eyes certify that it exists. Think of that mystery!
These poor little eyes! A strong light, or a pin, can destroy them. Yet the most
powerful engines of destruction, the most powerful cataclysms, the most
wonderful of existences, millions of suns and stars and moons and earth — all
depend for their existence upon, and have to be certified by, these two little
things! They say, “Nature, you exist”, and we believe nature exists. So with all
our senses.
What is this? Where is weakness? Who is strong? What is great and what is
small? What is high and what is low in this marvellous interdependence of
existence where the smallest atom is necessary for the existence of the whole?
Who is great and who is small? It is past finding out! And why? Because none
is great and none is small. All things are interpenetrated by that infinite ocean;
their reality is that infinite; and whatever there is on the surface is but that
infinite. The tree is infinite; so is everything that you see or feel — every grain
of sand, every thought, every soul, everything that exists, is infinite. Infinite is
finite and finite infinite. This is our existence.
Now, that may be all true, but all this feeling after the Infinite is at present
mostly unconscious. It is not that we have forgotten that infinite nature of ours:
none can ever do that. Who can ever think that he can be annihilated? Who can
think that he will die? None can. All our relation to the Infinite works in us
unconsciously. In a manner, therefore, we forget our real being, and hence all
this misery comes.
In practical daily life we are hurt by small things; we are enslaved by little
beings. Misery comes because we think we are finite — we are little beings.
And yet, how difficult it is to believe that we are infinite beings! In the midst of

all this misery and trouble, when a little thing may throw me off my balance, it
must be my care to believe that I am infinite. And the fact is that we are, and that
consciously or unconsciously we are all searching after that something which
is infinite; we are always seeking for something that is free.
There was never a human race which did not have a religion and worship
some sort of God or gods. Whether the God or gods existed or not is no
question; but what is the analysis of this psychological phenomenon? Why is
all the world trying to find, or seeking for, a God? Why? Because in spite of
all this bondage, in spite of nature and this tremendous energy of law grinding
us down, never allowing us to turn to any side — wherever we go, whatever
we want to do, we are thwarted by this law, which is everywhere — in spite of
all this, the human soul never forgets its freedom and is ever seeking it. The
search for freedom is the search of all religions; whether they know it or not,
whether they can formulate it well or ill, the idea is there. Even the lowest man,
the most ignorant, seeks for something which has power over nature’s laws. He
wants to see a demon, a ghost, a god — somebody who can subdue nature, for
whom nature is not almighty, for whom there is no law. “Oh, for somebody
who can break the law!” That is the cry coming from the human heart. We are
always seeking for someone who breaks the law. The rushing engine speeds
along the railway track; the little worm crawls out of its way. We at once say,
“The engine is dead matter, a machine; and the worm is alive,” because the
worm attempted to break the law. The engine, with all its power and might, can
never break the law. It is made to go in any direction man wants, and it cannot
do otherwise; but the worm, small and little though it was, attempted to break
the law and avoid the danger. It tried to assert itself against law, assert its
freedom; and there was the sign of the future God in it.
Everywhere we see this assertion of freedom, this freedom of the soul. It is
reflected in every religion in the shape of God or gods; but it is all external yet
— for those who only see the gods outside. Man decided that he was nothing.
He was afraid that he could never be free; so he went to seek for someone
outside of nature who was free. Then he thought that there were many and
many such free beings, and gradually he merged them all into one God of
gods and Lord of lords. Even that did not satisfy him. He came a little closer to
truth, a little nearer; and then gradually found that whatever he was, he was in
some way connected with the God of gods and Lord of lords; that he, though
he thought himself bound and low and weak, was somehow connected with that
God of gods. Then visions came to him; thought arose and knowledge

advanced. And he began to come nearer and nearer to that God, and at last
found out that God and all the gods, this whole psychological phenomenon
connected with the search for an all-powerful free soul, was but a reflection of
his own idea of himself. And then at last he discovered that it was not only true
that “God made man after His own image”, but that it was also true that man
made God after his own image. That brought out the idea of divine freedom.
The Divine Being was always within, the nearest of the near. Him we had ever
been seeking outside, and at last found that He is in the heart of our hearts. You
may know the story of the man who mistook his own heartbeat for somebody
knocking at the door, and went to the door and opened it, but found nobody
there, so he went back. Again he seemed to hear a knocking at the door, but
nobody was there. Then he understood that it was his own heartbeat, and he had
misinterpreted it as a knocking at the door. Similarly, man after his search
finds out that this infinite freedom that he was placing in imagination all the
time in the nature outside is the internal subject, the eternal Soul of souls; this
Reality, he himself.
Thus at last he comes to recognise this marvellous duality of existence: the
subject, infinite and finite in one — the Infinite Being is also the same finite
soul. The Infinite is caught, as it were, in the meshes of the intellect and
apparently manifests as finite beings, but the reality remains unchanged.
This is, therefore, true knowledge: that the Soul of our souls, the Reality that
is within us, is That which is unchangeable, eternal, ever-blessed, ever-free.
This is the only solid ground for us to stand upon.
This, then, is the end of all death, the advent of all immortality, the end of all
misery. And he who sees that One among the many, that One unchangeable in
the universe of change, he who sees Him as the Soul of his soul, unto him
belongs eternal peace — unto none else.
And in the midst of the depths of misery and degradation, the Soul sends a
ray of light, and man wakes up and finds that what is really his, he can never
lose. No, we can never lose what is really ours. Who can lose his being? Who
can lose his very existence? If I am good, it is the existence first, and then that
becomes coloured with the quality of goodness. If I am evil, it is the existence
first, and that becomes coloured with the quality of badness. That existence is
first, last, and always; it is never lost, but ever present.
Therefore, there is hope for all. None can die; none can be degraded for
ever. Life is but a playground, however gross the play may be. However we
may receive blows, and however knocked about we may be, the Soul is there

and is never injured. We are that Infinite.
Thus sang a Vedantin, “I never had fear nor doubt. Death never came to me. I
never had father or mother: for I was never born. Where are my foes? — for I
am All. I am the Existence and Knowledge and Bliss Absolute. I am It. I am It.
Anger and lust and jealousy, evil thoughts and all these things, never came to
me; for I am the Existence, the Knowledge, the Bliss Absolute. I am It. I am It.”
That is the remedy for all disease, the nectar that cures death. Here we are in
this world, and our nature rebels against it. But let us repeat, “I am It; I am It. I
have no fear, nor doubt, nor death. I have no sex, nor creed, nor colour. What
creed can I have? What sect is there to which I should belong? What sect can
hold me? I am in every sect!”
However much the body rebels, however much the mind rebels, in the midst
of the uttermost darkness, in the midst of agonising tortures, in the uttermost
despair, repeat this, once, twice, thrice, ever more. Light comes gently, slowly,
but surely it comes.
Many times I have been in the jaws of death, starving, footsore, and weary;
for days and days I had had no food, and often could walk no farther; I would
sink down under a tree, and life would seem ebbing away. I could not speak, I
could scarcely think, but at last the mind reverted to the idea: “I have no fear
nor death; I never hunger nor thirst. I am It! I am It! The whole of nature cannot
crush me; it is my servant. Assert thy strength, thou Lord of lords and God of
gods! Regain thy lost empire! Arise and walk and stop not!” And I would rise
up, reinvigorated, and here am I, living, today. Thus, whenever darkness
comes, assert the reality and everything adverse must vanish. For, after all, it is
but a dream. Mountain-high though the difficulties appear, terrible and gloomy
though all things seem, they are but Mâyâ. Fear not — it is banished. Crush it,
and it vanishes. Stamp upon it, and it dies. Be not afraid. Think not how many
times you fail. Never mind. Time is infinite. Go forward: assert yourself again
and again, and light must come. You may pray to everyone that was ever born,
but who will come to help you? And what of the way of death from which none
knows escape? Help thyself out by thyself. None else can help thee, friend. For
thou alone art thy greatest enemy, thou alone art thy greatest friend. Get hold of
the Self, then. Stand up. Don’t be afraid. In the midst of all miseries and all
weakness, let the Self come out, faint and imperceptible though it be at first.
You will gain courage, and at last like a lion you will roar out, “I am It! I am
It!” “I am neither a man, nor a woman, nor a god, nor a demon; no, nor any of
the animals, plants, or trees. I am neither poor nor rich, neither learned nor

ignorant. All these things are very little compared with what I am: for I am It! I
am It! Behold the sun and the moon and the stars: I am the light that is shining
in them! I am the beauty of the fire! I am the power in the universe! For, I am It!
I am It!
“Whoever thinks that I am little makes a mistake, for the Self is all that
exists. The sun exists because I declare it does, the world exists because I
declare it does. Without me they cannot remain, for I am Existence,
Knowledge, and Bliss Absolute — ever happy, ever pure, ever beautiful.
Behold, the sun is the cause of our vision, but is not itself ever affected by any
defect in the eyes of any one; even so I am. I am working through all organs,
working through everything, but never does the good and evil of work attach
to me. For me there is no law, nor Karma. I own the laws of Karma. I ever was
and ever am.
“My real pleasure was never in earthly things — in husband, wife, children,
and other things. For I am like the infinite blue sky: clouds of many colours
pass over it and play for a second; they move off, and there is the same
unchangeable blue. Happiness and misery, good and evil, may envelop me for
a moment, veiling the Self; but I am still there. They pass away because they
are changeable. I shine, because I am unchangeable. If misery comes, I know it
is finite, therefore it must die. If evil comes, I know it is finite, it must go. I
alone am infinite and untouched by anything. For I am the Infinite, that Eternal,
Changeless Self.” — So sings one of our poets.
Let us drink of this cup, this cup that leads to everything that is immortal,
everything that is unchangeable. Fear not. Believe not that we are evil, that we
are finite,. that we can ever die. It is not true.
“This is to be heard of, then to be thought upon, and then to be meditated
upon.” When the hands work,. the mind should repeat, “I am It. I am It.” Think
of it, dream of it, until it becomes bone of your bones and; flesh of your flesh,
until all the hideous dreams of littleness, of weakness, of misery, and of evil,
have entirely vanished, and no more then can the Truth be hidden from you
even for a moment.

The Way To Blessedness
I shall tell you a story from the Vedas tonight. The Vedas are the sacred
scriptures of the Hindus and are a vast collection of literature, of which the last
part is called the Vedanta, meaning the end of the Vedas. It deals with the
theories contained in them, and more especially the philosophy with which we
are concerned. It is written in archaic Sanskrit, and you must remember it was
written thousands of years ago. There was a certain man who wanted to make a
big sacrifice. In the religion of the Hindus, sacrifice plays a great part. There
are various sorts of sacrifices. They make altars and pour oblations into the
fire, and repeat various hymns and so forth; and at the end of the sacrifice they
make a gift to the Brahmins and the poor. Each sacrifice has its peculiar gift.
There was one sacrifice, where everything a man possessed had to be given up.
Now this man, though rich, was miserly, and at the same time wanted to get a
great name for having done this most difficult sacrifice. And when he did this
sacrifice, instead of giving up everything he had, he gave away only his blind,
lame, and old cows that would never more give milk. But he had a son called
Nachiketas, a bright young boy, who, observing the poor gifts made by his
father, and pondering on the demerit that was sure to accrue to him thereby,
resolved to make amends for them by making a gift of himself. So he went to
his father and said, “And to whom will you give me?” The father did not
answer the boy, and the boy asked a second and a third time, when the father
got vexed and said, “Thee I give unto Yama, thee I give unto Death.” And the
boy went straight to the kingdom of Yama. Yama was not at home, so he waited
there. After three days Yama came and said to him, “O Brahmin, thou art my
guest, and thou hast been here for three days without any food. I salute thee,
and in order to repay thee for this trouble, I will grant thee three boons.” Then
the boy asked the first boon, “May my father ’s anger against me get calmed
down,” and the second boon was that he wanted to know about a certain
sacrifice. And then came the third boon. “When a man dies, the question arises:
What becomes of him: Some people say he ceases to exist. Others say that he
exists. Please tell me what the answer is. This is the third boon that I want.”
Then Death answered, “The gods in ancient times tried to unravel the mystery;
this mystery is so fine that it is hard to know. Ask for some other boon: do not
ask this one. Ask for a long life of a hundred years. Ask for cattle and horses,
ask for great kingdoms. Do not press me to answer this. Whatever man desires

for his enjoyment, ask all that and I will fulfil it, but do not want to know this
secret.” “No sir,” said the boy, “man is not to be satisfied with wealth; if wealth
were wanted, we should get it, if we have only seen you. We shall also live so
long as you rule. What decaying mortal, living in the world below and
possessed of knowledge, having gained the company of the undecaying and the
immortal, will delight in long life, knowing the nature of the pleasure
produced by song and sport? Therefore, tell me this secret about the great
hereafter, I do not want anything else; that is what Nachiketas wants, the
mystery of death.” Then the God of death was pleased. We have been saying in
the last two or three lectures that this Jnâna prepares the mind. So you see here
that the first preparation is that a man must desire nothing else but the truth, and
truth for truth’s sake. See how this boy rejected all these gifts which Death
offered him; possessions, property, wealth, long life, and everything he was
ready to sacrifice for this one idea, knowledge only, the truth. Thus alone can
truth come. The God of death became pleased. “Here are two ways,” he said,
“one of enjoyment, the other of blessedness. These two in various ways draw
mankind. He becomes a sage who, of these two, takes up that which leads to
blessedness, and he degenerates who takes up the road to enjoyment. I praise
you, Nachiketas; you have not asked for desire. In various ways I tempted you
towards the path of enjoyment; you resisted them all, you have known that
knowledge is much higher than a life of enjoyment.
“You have understood that the man who lives in ignorance and enjoys, is not
different from the brute beast. Yet there are many who, though steeped in
ignorance, in the pride of their hearts, think that they are great sages and go
round and round in many crooked ways, like the blind led by the blind. This
truth, Nachiketas, never shines in the heart of those who are like ignorant
children, deluded by a few lumps of earth. They do not understand this world,
nor the other world. They deny this and the other one, and thus again and again
come under my control. Many have not even the opportunity to hear about it;
and many, though hearing, cannot know it, because the teacher must be
wonderful; so must he be wonderful too unto whom the knowledge is carried.
If the speaker is a man who is not highly advanced, then even a hundred times
heard, and a hundred times taught, the truth never illumines the soul. Do not
disturb your mind by vain arguments, Nachiketas; this truth only becomes
effulgent in the heart which has been made pure. He who cannot be seen
without the greatest difficulty, He who is hidden, He who has entered the cave
of the heart of hearts — the Ancient One — cannot be seen with the external

eyes; seeing Him with the eyes of the soul, one gives up both pleasure and pain.
He who knows this secret gives up all his vain desires, and attains this
superfine perception, and thus becomes ever blessed. Nachiketas, that is the
way to blessedness. He is beyond all virtue, beyond all vice, beyond all duties,
beyond all non-duties, beyond all existence, beyond all that is to be; he who
knows this, alone knows. He whom all the Vedas seek, to see whom men
undergo all sorts of asceticism, I will tell you His name: It is Om. This eternal
Om is the Brahman, this is the immortal One; he who knows the secret of this
— whatever he desires is his. This Self of man, Nachiketas, about which you
seek to know, is never born, and never dies. Without beginning, ever existing,
this Ancient One is not destroyed, when the body is destroyed. If the slayer
thinks that he can slay, and if the slain man thinks he is slain, both are mistaken,
for neither can the Self kill, nor can It be killed. Infinitely smaller than the
smallest particle, infinitely greater than the greatest existence, the Lord of all
lives in the cave of the heart of every being. He who has become sinless sees
Him in all His glory, through the mercy of the same Lord. (We find that the
mercy of God is one of the causes of God-realisation.) Sitting He goes far,
lying He goes everywhere; who else but men of purified and subtle
understanding are qualified to know the God in whom all conflicting attributes
meet? Without body, yet living in the body, untouched, yet seemingly in
contact, omnipresent — knowing the Âtman to be such, the sage gives up all
misery. This Atman is not to be attained by the study of the Vedas, nor by the
highest intellect, nor by much learning. Whom the Atman seeks, he gets the
Atman; unto him He discloses His glory. He who is continuously doing evil
deeds, he whose mind is not calm, he who cannot meditates he who is always
disturbed and fickle — he cannot understand and realise this Atman who has
entered the cave of the heart. This body, O Nachiketas, is the chariot, the
organs of the senses are the horses, the mind is the reins, the intellect is the
charioteer, and the soul is the rider in the chariot. When the soul joins himself
with the charioteer, Buddhi or intellect, and then through it with the mind, the
reins, and through it again with the organs, the horses, he is said to be the
enjoyer; he perceives, he works, he acts. He whose mind is not under control,
and who has no discrimination, his senses are not controllable like vicious
horses in the hands of a driver. But he who has discrimination, whose mind is
controlled, his organs are always controllable like good horses in the hands of
a driver. He who has discrimination, whose mind is always in the way to
understand truth, who is always pure — he receives that truth, attaining which

there is no rebirth. This, O Nachiketas, is very difficult, the way is long, and it
is hard to attain. It is only those who have attained the finest perception that can
see it, that can understand it. Yet do not be frightened. Awake, be up and doing.
Do not stop till you have reached the goal. For the sages say that the task is
very difficult, like walking on the edge of a razor. He who is beyond the
senses, beyond all touch, beyond all form, beyond all taste, the Unchangeable,
the Infinite, beyond even intelligence, the Indestructible — knowing Him alone,
we are safe from the jaws of death.”
So far, we see that Yama describes the goal that is to be attained. The first
idea that we get is that birth, death, misery, and the various tossings about to
which we are subject in the world can only be overcome by knowing that
which is real. What is real? That which never changes, the Self of man, the Self
behind the universe. Then, again, it is said that it is very difficult to know Him.
Knowing does not mean simply intellectual assent, it means realisation. Again
and again we have read that this Self is to be seen, to be perceived. We cannot
see it with the eyes; the perception for it has to become superfine. It is gross
perception by which the walls and books are perceived, but the perception to
discern the truth has to be made very fine, and that is the whole secret of this
knowledge. Then Yama says that one must be very pure. That is the way to
making the perception superfine; and then he goes on to tell us other ways.
That self-existent One is far removed from the organs. The organs or
instruments see outwards, but the self-existing One, the Self, is seen inwards.
You must remember the qualification that is required: the desire to know this
Self by turning the eyes inwards. All these beautiful things that we see in nature
are very good, but that is not the way to see God. We must learn how to turn the
eyes inwards. The eagerness of the eyes to see outwards should be restricted.
When you walk in a busy street, it is difficult to hear the man speak with whom
you are walking, because of the noise of the passing carriages. He cannot hear
you because there is so much noise. The mind is going outwards, and you
cannot hear the man who is next to you. In the same way, this world around us
is making such a noise that it draws the mind outwards. How can we see the
Self? This going outwards must be stopped. That is what is meant by turning
the eyes inwards, and then alone the glory of the Lord within will be seen.
What is this Self? We have seen that It is even beyond the intellect. We learn
from the same Upanishad that this Self is eternal and omnipresent, that you and
I and all of us are omnipresent beings, and that the Self is changeless. Now this
omnipresent Being can be only one. There cannot be two beings who are

equally omnipresent — how could that be? There cannot be two beings who
are infinite, and the result is, there is really only one Self, and you, I, and the
whole universe are but one, appearing as many. “As the one fire entering into
the world manifests itself in various ways, even so that one Self, the Self of all,
manifests Itself in every form.” But the question is: If this Self is perfect and
pure, and the One Being of the universe, what becomes of It when It goes into
the impure body, the wicked body, the good body, and so on? How can It
remain perfect? “The one sun is the cause of vision in every eye, yet it is not
touched by the defects in the eyes of any.” If a man has jaundice he sees
everything as yellow; the cause of his vision is the sun, but his seeing
everything as yellow does not touch the sun. Even so this One Being, though
the Self of every one, is not touched by the purities or impurities outside. “In
this world where everything is evanescent, he who knows Him who never
changes, in this world of insentience, he who knows the one sentient Being, in
this world of many, he who knows this One and sees Him in his own soul, unto
him belongs eternal bliss, to none else, to none else. There the sun shines not,
nor the stars, nor the lightning flashes, what to speak of fire? He shining,
everything shines; through His light everything becomes effulgent. When all
the desires that trouble the heart cease, then the mortal becomes immortal, and
here one attains Brahman. When all the crookedness of the heart disappears,
when all its knots are cut asunder, then alone the mortal becomes immortal.
This is the way. May this study bless us; may it maintain us; may it give us
strength, may it become energy in us; may we not hate each other; peace unto
all!”
This is the line of thought that you will find in the Vedanta philosophy. We
see first that here is a thought entirely different from what you see anywhere
else in the world. In the oldest parts of the Vedas the search was the same as in
other books, the search was outside. In some of the old, old books, the question
was raised, “What was in the beginning? When there was neither aught nor
naught, when darkness was covering darkness, who created all this?” So the
search began. And they began to talk about the angels, the Devas, and all sorts
of things, and later on we find that they gave it up as hopeless. In their day the
search was outside and they could find nothing; but in later days, as we read in
the Vedas, they had to look inside for the self-existent One. This Is the one
fundamental idea in the Vedas, that our search in the stars, the nebulae, the
Milky Way, in the whole of this external universe leads to nothing, never
solves the problem of life and death. The wonderful mechanism inside had to

be analysed, and it revealed to them the secret of the universe; nor star or sun
could do it. Man had to be anatomised; not the body, but the soul of man. In that
soul they found the answer. What was the answer they found? That behind the
body, behind even the mind, there is the self-existent One. He dies not, nor is
He born. The self-existent One it omnipresent, because He has no form. That
which has no form or shape, that which is not limited by space or time, cannot
live in a certain place. How can it? It is everywhere, omnipresent, equally
present through all of us.
What is the soul of man? There was one party who held that there is a Being,
God, and an infinite number of souls besides, who are eternally separate from
God in essence, and form, and everything. This is dualism. This is the old, old
crude idea. The answer given by another party was that the soul was a part of
the infinite Divine Existence. Just as this body is a little world by itself, and
behind it is the mind or thought, and behind that is the individual soul,
similarly, the whole world is a body, and behind that is the universal mind, and
behind that is the universal Soul. Just as this body is a portion of the universal
body, so this mind is a portion of the universal mind, and the soul of man a
portion of the universal Soul. This is what is called the Vishishtâdvaita,
qualified monism. Now, we know that the universal Soul is infinite. How can
infinity have parts? How can it be broken up, divided? It may be very poetic to
say that I am a spark of the Infinite, but it is absurd to the thinking mind. What
is meant by dividing Infinity? Is it something material that you can part or
separate it into pieces? Infinite can never be divided. If that were possible, it
would be no more Infinite. What is the conclusion then? The answer is, that
Soul which is the universal is you; you are not a part but the whole of It. You
are the whole of God. Then what are all these varieties? We find so many
millions of individual souls. What are they? If the sun reflects upon millions of
globules of water, in each globule is the form, the perfect image of the sun; but
they are only images, and the real sun is only one. So this apparent soul that is
in every one of us is only the image of God, nothing beyond that. The real
Being who is behind, is that one God. We are all one there. As Self, there is
only one in the universe. It is in me and you, and is only one; and that one Self
has been reflected in all these various bodies as various different selves. But
we do not know this; we think we are separate from each other and separate
from Him. And so long as we think this, misery will be in the world. This is
hallucination.
Then the other great source of misery is fear. Why does one man injure

another? Because he fears he will not have enough enjoyment. One man fears
that, perhaps, he will not have enough money, and that fear causes him to injure
others and rob them. How can there be fear if there is only one existence? If a
thunderbolt falls on my head, it was I who was the thunderbolt, because I am
the only existence. If a plague comes, it is I; if a tiger comes, it is I. If death
comes, it is I. I am both death and life. We see that fear comes with the idea that
there are two in the universe. We have always heard it preached, “Love one
another”. What for? That doctrine was preached, but the explanation is here.
Why should I love every one? Because they and I are one. Why should I love
my brother? Because he and I are one. There is this oneness; this solidarity of
the whole universe. From the lowest worm that crawls under our feet to the
highest beings that ever lived — all have various bodies, but are the one Soul.
Through all mouths, you eat; through all hands, you work; through all eyes,
you see. You enjoy health in millions of bodies, you are suffering from disease
in millions of bodies. When this idea comes, and we realise it, see it, feel it,
then will misery cease, and fear with it. How can I die? There is nothing
beyond me. Fear ceases, and then alone comes perfect happiness and perfect
love. That universal sympathy, universal love, universal bliss, that never
changes, raises man above everything. It has no reactions and no misery can
touch it; but this little eating and drinking of the world always brings a
reaction. The whole cause of it is this dualism, the idea that I am separate from
the universe, separate from God. But as soon as we have realised that “I am He,
I am the Self of the universe, I am eternally blessed, eternally free” — then will
come real love, fear will vanish, and all misery cease.
Yajnavalkya And Maitreyi
We say, “That day is indeed a bad day on which you do not hear the name of
the Lord, but a cloudy day is not a bad day at all.” Yâjnavalkya was a great
sage. You know, the Shastras in India enjoin that every man should give up the
world when he becomes old. So Yajnavalkya said to his wife, “My beloved,
here is all my money, and my possessions, and I am going away.” She replied,
“Sir, if I had this whole earth full of wealth, would that give me immortality?”
Yajnavalkya said, “No, it will not. You will be rich, and that will be all, but
wealth cannot give us immortality.” She replied, “what shall I do to gain that
through which I shall become immortal? If you know, tell me.” Yajnavalkya
replied, “You have been always my beloved; you are more beloved now by this

question. Come, take your seat, and I will tell you; and when you have heard,
meditate upon it.” He said, “It is not for the sake of the husband that the wife
loves the husband, but for the sake of the Âtman that she loves the husband,
because she loves the Self. None loves the wife for the sake of the wife; but it is
because one loves the Self that one loves the wife. None loves the children for
the children; but because one loves the Self, therefore one loves the children.
None loves wealth on account of the wealth; but because one loves the Self,
therefore one loves wealth. None loves the Brâhmin for the sake of the
Brahmin; but because one loves the Self, one loves the Brahmin. So, none
loves the Kshatriya for the sake of the Kshatriya, but because one loves the
Self. Neither does any one love the world on account of the world, but because
one loves the Self. None, similarly, loves the gods on account of the gods, but
because one loves the Self. None loves a thing for that thing’s sake; but it is for
the Self that one loves it. This Self, therefore, is to be heard, reasoned about,
and meditated upon. O my Maitreyi, when that Self has been heard, when that
Self has been seen, when that Self has been realised, then, all this becomes
known.” What do we get then? Before us we find a curious philosophy. The
statement has been made that every love is selfishness in the lowest sense of the
word: because I love myself, therefore I love another; it cannot be. There have
been philosophers in modern times who have said that self is the only motive
power in the world. That is true, and yet it is wrong. But this self is but the
shadow of that real Self which is behind. It appears wrong and evil because it is
small. That infinite love for the Self, which is the universe, appears to be evil,
appears to be small, because it appears through a small part. Even when the
wife loves the husband, whether she knows it or not, she loves the husband for
that Self. It is selfishness as it is manifested in the world, but that selfishness is
really but a small part of that Self-ness. Whenever one loves, one has to love in
and through the Self. This Self has to be known. What is the difference? Those
that love the Self without knowing what It is, their love is selfishness. Those
that love, knowing what that Self is, their love is free; they are sages. “Him the
Brahmin gives up who sees the Brahmin anywhere else but in the Self. Him the
Kshatriya gives up who sees the Kshatriya anywhere else but in the Self. The
world gives him up who sees this world anywhere but in that Atman. The gods
give him up who loves the gods knowing them to be anywhere else but in the
Atman. Everything goes away from him who knows everything as something
else except the Atman. These Brahmins, these Kshatriyas, this world, these
gods, whatever exists, everything is that Atman”. Thus he explains what he

means by love.
Every time we particularise an object, we differentiate it from the Self. I am
trying to love a woman; as soon as that woman is particularised, she is
separated from the Atman, and my love for her will not be eternal, but will end
in grief. But as soon as I see that woman as the Atman, that love becomes
perfect, and will never suffer. So with everything; as soon as you are attached
to anything in the universe, detaching it from the universe as a whole, from the
Atman, there comes a reaction. With everything that we love outside the Self,
grief and misery will be the result. If we enjoy everything in the Self, and as the
Self, no misery or reaction will come. This is perfect bliss. How to come to
this ideal? Yajnavalkya goes on to tell us the process by which to reach that
state. The universe is infinite: how can we take every particular thing and look
at it as the Atman, without knowing the Atman? “As with a drum when we are at
a distance we cannot catch the sound, we cannot conquer the sound; but as soon
as we come to the drum and put our hand on it, the sound is conquered. When
the conch-shell is being blown, we cannot catch or conquer the sound, until we
come near and get hold of the shell, and then it is conquered. When the Vina is
being played, when we have come to the Vina, we get to the centre whence the
sound is proceeding. As when some one is burning damp fuel, smoke and
sparks of various kinds come, even so, from this great One has been breathed
out knowledge; everything has come out of Him. He breathed out, as it were,
all knowledge. As to all water, the one goal is the ocean; as to all touch, the
skin is the one centre; as of all smell, the nose is the one centre; as of all taste,
the tongue is the one goal; as of all form, the eyes are the one goal; as of all
sounds, the ears are the one goal; as of all thought, the mind is the one goal; as
of all knowledge, the heart is the one goal; as of all work, the hands are the one
goal; as a morsel of salt put into the sea-water melts away, and we cannot take
it back, even so, Maitreyi, is this Universal Being eternally infinite; all
knowledge is in Him. The whole universe rises from Him, and again goes
down into Him. No more is there any knowledge, dying, or death.” We get the
idea that we have all come just like sparks from Him, and when you know Him,
then you go back and become one with Him again. We are the Universal.
Maitreyi became frightened, just as everywhere people become frightened.
Said she, “Sir, here is exactly where you have thrown a delusion over me. You
have frightened me by saying there will be no more gods; all individuality will
be lost. There will be no one to recognise, no one to love, no one to hate. What
will become of us?” “Maitreyi, I do not mean to puzzle you, or rather let it rest

here. You may be frightened. Where there are two, one sees another, one hears
another, one welcomes another, one thinks of another, one knows another. But
when the whole has become that Atman, who is seen by whom, who is to be
heard by whom, who is to be welcomed by whom, who is to be known by
whom?” That one idea was taken up by Schopenhauer and echoed in his
philosophy. Through whom we know this universe, through what to know
Him? How to know the knower? By what means can we know the knower?
How can that be? Because in and through that we know everything. By what
means can we know Him? By no means, for He is that means.
So far the idea is that it is all One Infinite Being. That is the real
individuality, when there is no more division, and no more parts; these little
ideas are very low, illusive. But yet in and through every spark of the
individuality is shining that Infinite. Everything is a manifestation of the
Atman. How to reach that? First you make the statement, just as Yajnavalkya
himself tells us: “This Atman is first to be heard of.” So he stated the case; then
he argued it out, and the last demonstration was how to know That, through
which all knowledge is possible. Then, last, it is to be meditated upon. He takes
the contrast, the microcosm and the macrocosm, and shows how they are
rolling on in particular lines, and how it is all beautiful. “This earth is so
blissful, so helpful to every being; and all beings are so helpful to this earth: all
these are manifestations of that Self-effulgent One, the Atman.” All that is bliss,
even in the lowest sense, is but the reflection of Him. All that is good is His
reflection, and when that reflection is a shadow it is called evil. There are no
two Gods. When He is less manifested, it is called darkness, evil; and when He
is more manifested, it is called light. That is all. Good and evil are only a
question of degree: more manifested or less manifested. Just take the example
of our own lives. How many things we see in our childhood which we think to
be good, but which really are evil, and how many things seem to be evil which
are good! How the ideas change! How an idea goes up and up! What we
thought very good at one time we do not think so good now. So good and evil
are but superstitions, and do not exist. The difference is only in degree. It is all
a manifestation of that Atman; He is being manifested in everything; only,
when the manifestation is very thick we call it evil; and when it is very thin, we
call it good. It is the best, when all covering goes away. So everything that is in
the universe is to be meditated upon in that sense alone, that we can see it as all
good, because it is the best. There is evil and there is good; and the apex, the
centre, is the Reality. He is neither evil nor good; He is the best. The best can be

only one, the good can be many and the evil many. There will be degrees of
variation between the good and the evil, but the best is only one, and that best,
when seen through thin coverings, we call different sorts of good, and when
through thick covers, we call evil. Good and evil are different forms of
superstition. They have gone through all sorts of dualistic delusion and all
sorts of ideas, and the words have sunk into the hearts of human beings,
terrorising men and women and living there as terrible tyrants. They make us
become tigers. All the hatred with which we hate others is caused by these
foolish ideas which we have imbibed since our childhood — good and evil.
Our judgment of humanity becomes entirely false; we make this beautiful earth
a hell; but as soon as we can give up good and evil, it becomes a heaven.
“This earth is blissful (‘sweet’ is the literal translation) to all beings and all
beings are sweet to this earth; they all help each other. And all the sweetness is
the Atman, that effulgent, immortal One who is inside this earth.” Whose is this
sweetness? How can there be any sweetness but He? That one sweetness is
manifesting itself in various ways. Wherever there is any love, any sweetness
in any human being, either in a saint or a sinner, either in an angel or a
murderer, either in the body, mind, or the senses, it is He. Physical enjoyments
are but He, mental enjoyments are but He, spiritual enjoyments are but He.
How can there be anything but He? How can there be twenty thousand gods and
devils fighting with each other? Childish dreams! Whatever is the lowest
physical enjoyment is He, and the highest spiritual enjoyment is He. There is
no sweetness but He. Thus says Yajnavalkya. When you come to that state and
look upon all things with the same eye, when you see even in the drunkard’s
pleasure in drink only that sweetness, then you have got the truth, and then
alone you will know what happiness means, what peace means, what love
means; and so long as toll make these vain distinctions, silly, childish, foolish
superstitions, all sorts of misery will come. But that immortal One, the
effulgent One, He is inside the earth, it is all His sweetness, and the same
sweetness is in the body. This body is the earth, as it were, and inside all the
powers of the body, all the enjoyments of the body, is He; the eyes see, the skin
touches; what are all these enjoyments? That Self-effulgent One who is in the
body, He is the Atman. This world, so sweet to all beings, and every being so
sweet to it, is but the Self-effulgent; the Immortal is the bliss in that world. In us
also, He is that bliss. He is the Brahman. “This air is so sweet to all beings, and
all beings are so sweet to it. But He who is that Self-effulgent Immortal Being
in the air — is also in this body. He is expressing Himself as the life of all

beings. This sun is so sweet to all beings. All beings are so sweet to this sun.
He who is the Self-effulgent Being in the sun, we reflect Him as the smaller
light. What can be there but His reflection? He is in the body, and it is His
reflection which makes us see the light. This moon is so sweet to all, and every
one is so sweet to the moon, but that Self-effulgent and Immortal One who is
the soul of that moon, He is in us expressing Himself as mind. This lightning is
so beautiful, every one is so sweet to the lightning, but the Self-effulgent and
Immortal One is the soul of this lightning, and is also in us, because all is that
Brahman. The Atman, the Self, is the king of all beings.” These ideas are very
helpful to men; they are for meditation. For instance, meditate on the earth;
think of the earth and at the same time know that we have That which is in the
earth, that both are the same. Identify the body with the earth, and identify the
soul with the Soul behind. Identify the air with the soul that is in the air and that
is in me. They are all one, manifested in different forms. To realise this unity is
the end and aim of all meditation, and this is what Yajnavalkya was trying to
explain to Maitreyi.
Soul, Nature, And God
According to the Vedanta philosophy, man consists of three substances, so to
say. The outermost is the body, the gross form of man, in which are the
instruments of sensation, such as the eyes, nose, ears, and so forth. This eye is
not the organ of vision; it is only the instrument. Behind that is the organ. So,
the ears are not the organs of hearing; they are the instruments, and behind
them is the organ, or what, in modern physiology, is called the centre. The
organs are called Indriyas in Sanskrit. If the centre which governs the eyes be
destroyed, the eyes will not see; so with all our senses. The organs, again,
cannot sense anything by themselves, until there be something else attached to
them. That something is the mind. Many times you have observed that you were
deeply engaged in a certain thought, and the clock struck and you did not hear
it. Why? The ear was there; vibrations entered it and were carried into the
brain, yet you did not hear, because the mind was not joined to the organ. The
impressions of external objects are carried to the organs, and when the mind is
attached to them, it takes the impressions and gives them, as it were, a
colouring, which is called egoism, “I”. Take the case of a mosquito biting me
on the finger when I am engaged in some work. I do not feel it, because my
mind is joined to something else. Later, when my mind is joined to the

impression conveyed to the Indriyas, a reaction comes. With this reaction I
become conscious of the mosquito. So even the mind joining itself to the
organs is not sufficient; there must come the reaction in the form of will. This
faculty from which the reaction comes, the faculty of knowledge or intellect, is
called “Buddhi” First, there must be the external instrument, next the organ,
next the mind must join itself to the organ, then must come the reaction of
intellect, and when all these things are complete, there immediately flashes the
idea, “I and the external object”, and there is a perception, a concept,
knowledge. The external organ, which is only the instrument, is in the body,
and behind that is the internal organ which is finer; then there is the mind, then
the intellectual faculty, then egoism, which says, “I” — I see, I hear, and so
forth. The whole process is carried on by certain forces; you may call them
vital forces; in Sanskrit they are called Prâna. This gross part of man, this
body, in which are the external instruments, is called in Sanskrit, Sthula
Sharira, the gross body; behind it comes the series, beginning with the organs,
the mind, the intellect, the egoism. These and the vital forces form a compound
which is called the fine body, the Sukshma Sharira. These forces are composed
of very fine elements, so fine that no amount of injury to this body can destroy
them; they survive all the shocks given to this body. The gross body we see is
composed of gross material, and as such it is always being renewed and
changing continuously. But the internal organs, the mind, the intellect, and the
egoism are composed of the finest material, so fine that they will endure for
aeons and aeons. They are so fine that they cannot be resisted by anything; they
can get through any obstruction. The gross body is non-intelligent, so is the
fine, being composed of fine matter. Although one part is called mind, another
the intellect, and the third egoism, yet we see at a glance that no one of them
can be the “Knower”. None of them can be the perceiver, the witness, the one
for whom action is made, and who is the seer of the action. All these
movements in the mind, or the faculty of intellection, or egoism, must be for
some one else. These being composed of fine matter cannot be self-effulgent.
Their luminosity cannot be in themselves. This manifestation of the table, for
instance, cannot be due to any material thing. Therefore there must be some
one behind them all, who is the real manifester, the real seer, the real enjoyer
and He in Sanskrit is called the Atman, the Soul of man, the real Self of man.
He it is who really sees things. The external instruments and the organs catch
the impressions and convey them to the mind, and the mind to the intellect, and
the intellect reflects them as on a mirror, and back of it is the Soul that looks

on them and gives His orders and His directions. He is the ruler of all these
instruments, the master in the house, the enthroned king in the body. The
faculty of egoism, the faculty of intellection, the faculty of cogitation, the
organs, the instruments, the body, all of them obey His commands. It is He who
is manifesting all of these. This is the Atman of man. Similarly, we can see that
what is in a small part of the universe must also be in the whole universe. If
conformity is the law of the universe, every part of the universe must have
been built on the same plan as the whole. So we naturally think that behind the
gross material form which we call this universe of ours, there must be a
universe of finer matter, which we call thought, and behind that there must be a
Soul, which makes all this thought possible, which commands, which is the
enthroned king of this universe. That soul which is behind each mind and each
body is called Pratyagâtman, the individual Atman, and that Soul which is
behind the universe as its guide, ruler, and governor, is God.
The next thing to consider is whence all these things come. The answer is:
What is meant by coming? If it means that something can be produced out of
nothing, it is impossible. All this creation, manifestation, cannot be produced
out of zero. Nothing can be produced without a cause, and the effect is but the
cause reproduced. Here is a glass. Suppose we break it to pieces, and pulverise
it, and by means of chemicals almost annihilate it. Will it go back to zero?
Certainly not. The form will break, but the particles of which it is made will be
there; they will go beyond our senses, but they remain, and it is quite possible
that out of these materials another glass may be made. If this is true in one case,
it will be so in every case. Something cannot be made out of nothing. Nor can
something be made to go back to nothing. It may become finer and finer, and
then again grosser and grosser. The raindrop is drawn from the ocean in the
form of vapour, and drifts away through the air to the mountains; there it
changes again into water and flows back through hundreds of miles down to
the mother ocean. The seed produces the tree. The tree dies, leaving only the
seed. Again it comes up as another tree, which again ends in the seed, and so
on. Look at a bird, how from; the egg it springs, becomes a beautiful bird,
lives its life and then dies, leaving only other eggs, containing germs of future
birds. So with the animals; so with men. Everything begins, as it were, from
certain seeds, certain rudiments, certain fine forms, and becomes grosser and
grosser as it develops; and then again it goes back to that fine form and
subsides. The whole universe is going on in this way. There comes a time when
this whole universe melts down and becomes finer and at last disappears

entirely, as it were, but remains as superfine matter. We know through modern
science and astronomy that this earth is cooling down, and in course of time it
will become very cold, and then it will break to pieces and become finer and
finer until it becomes ether once more. Yet the particles will all remain to form
the material out of which another earth will be projected. Again that will
disappear, and another will come out. So this universe will go back to its
causes, and again its materials will come together and take form, like the wave
that goes down, rises again, and takes shape. The acts of going back to causes
and coming out again, taking form, are called in Sanskrit Sankocha and
Vikâsha, which mean shrinking and expanding. The whole universe, as it were,
shrinks, and then it expands again. To use the more accepted words of modern
science, they are involved and evolved. You hear about evolution, how all
forms grow from lower ones, slowly growing up and up. This is very true, but
each evolution presupposes an involution. We know that the sum total of
energy that is displayed in the universe is the same at all times, and that matter
is indestructible. By no means can you take away one particle of matter. You
cannot take away a foot-pound of energy or add one. The sum total is the same
always. Only the manifestation varies, being involved and evolved. So this
cycle is the evolution out of the involution of the previous cycle, and this cycle
will again be involved, getting finer and finer, and out of that will come the
next cycle. The whole universe is going on in this fashion. Thus we find that
there is no creation in the sense that something is created out of nothing. To
use a better word, there is manifestation, and God is the manifester of the
universe. The universe, as it were, is being breathed out of Him, and again it
shrinks into Him, and again He throws it out. A most beautiful simile is given
in the Vedas — “That eternal One breathes out this universe and breathes it in.”
Just as we can breathe out a little particle of dust and breathe it in again. That is
all very good, but the question may be asked: How we, it at the first cycle? The
answer is: What is the meaning of a first cycle? There was none. If you can
give a beginning to time, the whole concept of time will be destroyed. Try to
think of a limit where time began, you have to think of time beyond that limit.
Try to think where space begins, you will have to think of space beyond that.
Time and space are infinite, and therefore have neither beginning nor end. This
is a better idea than that God created the universe in five minutes and then went
to sleep, and since then has been sleeping. On the other hand, this idea will give
us God as the Eternal Creator. Here is a series of waves rising and falling, and
God is directing this eternal process. As the universe is without beginning and

without end, so is God. We see that it must necessarily be so, because if we say
there was a time when there was no creation, either in a gross or a fine form,
then there was no God, because God is known to us as Sâkshi, the Witness of
the universe. When the universe did not exist, neither did He. One concept
follows the other. The idea of the cause we get from the idea of the effect, and
if there is no effect, there will be no cause. It naturally follows that as the
universe is eternal, God is eternal.
The soul must also be eternal. Why? In the first place we see that the soul is
not matter. It is neither a gross body, nor a fine body, which we call mind or
thought. It is neither a physical body, nor what in Christianity is called a
spiritual body. It is the gross body and the spiritual body that are liable to
change. The gross body is liable to change almost every minute and dies, but
the spiritual body endures through long periods, until one becomes free, when
it also falls away. When a man becomes free, the spiritual body disperses. The
gross body disintegrates every time a man dies. The soul not being made of
any particles must be indestructible. What do we mean by destruction?
Destruction is disintegration of the materials out of which anything is
composed. If this glass is broken into pieces, the materials will disintegrate,
and that will be the destruction of the glass. Disintegration of particles is what
we mean by destruction. It naturally follows that nothing that is not composed
of particles can be destroyed, can ever be disintegrated. The soul is not
composed of any materials. It is unity indivisible. Therefore it must be
indestructible. For the same reasons it must also be without any beginning. So
the soul is without any beginning and end.
We have three entities. Here is nature which is infinite, but changeful. The
whole of nature is without beginning and end, but within it are multifarious
changes. It is like a river that runs down to the sea for thousands of years. It is
the same river always, but it is changing every minute, the particles of water
are changing their position constantly. Then there is God, unchangeable, the
ruler; and there is the soul unchangeable as God, eternal but under the ruler.
One is the master, the other the servant, and the third one is nature.
God being the cause of the projection, the continuance, and the dissolution
of the universe, the cause must be present to produce the effect. Not only so, the
cause becomes the effect. Glass is produced out of certain materials and certain
forces used by the manufacturer. In the glass there are those forces plus the
materials. The forces used have become the force of adhesion, and if that force
goes the glass will fall to pieces; the materials also are undoubtedly in the

glass. Only their form is changed. The cause has become the effect. Wherever
you see an effect you can always analyze it into a cause, the cause manifests
itself as the effect. It follows, if God is the cause of the universe, and the
universe is the effect, that God has become the universe. If souls are the effect,
and God the cause, God has become the souls. Each soul, therefore, is a part of
God. “As from a mass of fire an infinite number of sparks fly, even so from
the Eternal One all this universe of souls has come out.”
We have seen that there is the eternal God, and there is eternal nature. And
there is also an infinite number of eternal souls. This is the first stage in
religion, it is called dualism, the stage when man sees himself and God
eternally separate, when God is a separate entity by Him, self and man is a
separate entity by himself and nature is a separate entity by itself. This is
dualism, which holds that the subject and the object are opposed to each other
in everything. When man looks at nature, he is the subject and nature the object.
He sees the dualism between subject and object. When he looks at God, he sees
God as object and himself as the subject. They are entirely separate. This is the
dualism between man and God. This is generally the first view of religion.
Then comes another view which I have just shown to you. Man begins to
find out that if God is the cause of the universe and the universe the effect, God
Himself must have become the universe and the souls, and he is but a particle
of which God is the whole. We are but little beings, sparks of that mass of fire,
and the whole universe is a manifestation of God Himself. This is the next step.
In Sanskrit, it is called Vishishtâdvaita. Just as I have this body and this body
covers the soul, and the soul is in and through this body, so this whole universe
of infinite souls and nature forms, as it were, the body of God. When the
period of involution comes, the universe becomes finer and finer, yet remains
the body of God. When the gross manifestation comes, then also the universe
remains the body of God. Just as the human soul is the soul of the human body
and minds so God is the Soul of our souls. All of you have heard this
expression in every religion, “Soul of our souls”. That is what is meant by it.
He, as it were, resides in them, guides them, is the ruler of them all. In the first
view, that of dualism, each one of us is an individual, eternally separate from
God and nature. In the second view, we are individuals, but not separate from
God. We are like little particles floating in one mass, and that mass is God. We
are individuals but one in God. We are all in Him. We are all parts of Him, and
therefore we are One. And yet between man and man, man and God there is a
strict individuality, separate and yet not separate.

Then comes a still finer question. The question is: Can infinity have parts?
What is meant by parts of infinity? If you reason it out, you will find that it is
impossible. Infinity cannot be divided, it always remains infinite. If it could be
divided, each part would be infinite. And there cannot be two infinites. Suppose
there were, one would limit the other, and both would be finite. Infinity can
only be one, undivided. Thus the conclusion will be reached that the infinite is
one and not many, and that one Infinite Soul is reflecting itself through
thousands and thousands of mirrors, appearing as so many different souls. It is
the same Infinite Soul, which is the background of the universe, that we call
God. The same Infinite Soul also is the background of the human mind which
we call the human soul.
Cosmology
There are two worlds, the microcosm, and the macrocosm, the internal and the
external. We get truth from both of these by means of experience. The truth
gathered from internal experience is psychology, metaphysics, and religion;
from external experience, the physical sciences. Now a perfect truth should be
in harmony with experiences in both these worlds. The microcosm must bear
testimony to the macrocosm, and the macrocosm to the microcosm; physical
truth must have its counterpart in the internal world, and the internal world
must have its verification outside. Yet, as a rule, we find that many of these
truths are in conflict. At one period of the world’s history, the internals become
supreme, and they begin to fight the externals. At the present time the externals,
the physicists, have become supreme, and they have put down many claims of
psychologists and metaphysicians. So far as my knowledge goes, I find that the
real, essential parts of psychology are in perfect accord with the essential parts
of modern physical knowledge. It is not given to one individual to be great in
every respect; it is not given to one race or nation to be equally strong in the
research of all fields of knowledge. The modern European nations are very
strong in their research of external physical knowledge, but they are not so
strong in their study of the inner nature of man. On the other hand, the
Orientals have not been very strong in their researches of the external physical
world, but very strong in their researches of the internal. Therefore we find
that Oriental physics and other sciences are not in accordance with Occidental
Sciences; nor is Occidental psychology in harmony with Oriental psychology.
The Oriental physicists have been routed by Occidental scientists. At the same

time, each claims to rest on truth; and as we stated before, real truth in any field
of knowledge will not contradict itself; the truths internal are in harmony with
the truths external.
We all know the theories of the cosmos according to the modern
astronomers and physicists; and at the same time we all know how woefully
they undermine the theology of Europe, how these scientific discoveries that
are made act as a bomb thrown at its stronghold; and we know how theologians
have in all times attempted to put down these researches.
I want here to go over the psychological ideas of the Orientals about
cosmology and all that pertains to it, and you will find how wonderfully they
are in accordance with the latest discoveries of modern science; and where
there is disharmony, you will find that it is modern science which lacks and not
they. We all use the word nature. The old Sânkhya philosophers called it by two
different names, Prakriti, which is very much the same as the word nature, and
the more scientific name, Avyakta, undifferentiated, from which everything
proceeds, such as atoms, molecules, and forces, mind, thought, and
intelligence. It is startling to find that the philosophers and metaphysicians of
India stated ages ago that mind is material. What are our present materialists
trying to do, but to show that mind is as much a product of nature as the body?
And so is thought, and, we shall find by and by, intelligence also: all issue from
that nature which is called Avyakta, the undifferentiated. The Sankhyas define it
as the equilibrium of three forces, one of which is called Sattva, another Rajas,
and the third Tamas. Tamas, the lowest force, is that of attraction; a little higher
is Rajas, that of repulsion; and the highest is the balance of these two, Sattva; so
that when these two forces, attraction and repulsion, are held in perfect control
by the Sattva there is no creation, no movement in the world. As soon as this
equilibrium is lost, the balance is disturbed, and one of these forces gets
stronger than the other, motion sets in, and creation begins. This state of things
goes on cyclically, periodically. That is to say, there is a period of disturbance
of the balance, when forces begin to combine and recombine, and things
project outwards. At the same time, everything has a tendency to go back to the
primal state of equilibrium, and the time comes when that total annihilation of
all manifestation is reached. Again, after a period, the whole thing is disturbed,
projected outwards, and again it slowly goes down — like waves. All motion,
everything in this universe, can be likened to waves undergoing successive rise
and fall. Some of these philosophers hold that the whole universe quiets down
for a period. Others hold that this quieting down applies only to systems; that is

to say, that while our system here, this solar system, will quiet down and go
back into the undifferentiated state, millions of other systems will go the other
way, and will project outwards. I should rather favour the second opinion, that
this quieting down is not simultaneous over the whole of the universe, and that
in different parts different things go on. But the principle remains the same,
that all we see — that is, nature herself — is progressing in successive rises
and falls. The one stage, falling down, going back to balance, the perfect
equilibrium, is called Pralaya, the end of a cycle. The projection and the
Pralaya of the universe have been compared by theistical writers in India to the
outbreathing and inbreathing of God; God, as it were, breathes out the
universe, and it comes into Him again. When it quiets down, what becomes of
the universe? It exists, only in finer forms, in the form of cause, as it is called
in the Sankhya philosophy. It does not get rid of causation, time, and space;
they are there, only it comes to very fine and minute forms. Supposing that this
whole universe begins to shrink, till every one of us becomes just a little
molecule, we should not feel the change at all, because everything relating to
us would be shrinking at the same time. The whole thing goes down, and again
projects out, the cause brings out the effect, and so it goes on.
What we call matter in modern times was called by; the ancient
psychologists Bhutas, the external elements. There is one element which,
according to them, is eternal ; every other element is produced out of this one.
It is called Âkâsha. It is somewhat similar to the idea of ether of the moderns,
though not exactly similar. Along with this element, there is the primal energy
called Prâna. Prana and Akasha combine and recombine and form the elements
out of them. Then at the end of the Kalpa; everything subsides, and goes back
to Akasha and Prana. There is in the Rig-Veda, the oldest human writing in
existence, a beautiful passage describing creation, and it is most poetical —
“When there was neither aught nor naught, when darkness was rolling over
darkness, what existed?” and the answer is given, “It then existed without
vibration”. This Prana existed then, but there was no motion in it; Ânidavâtam
means “existed without vibration”. Vibration had stopped. Then when the Kalpa
begins, after an immense interval, the Anidavatam (unvibrating atom)
commences to vibrate, and blow after blow is given by Prana to Akasha. The
atoms become condensed, and as they are condensed different elements are
formed. We generally find these things very curiously translated; people do not
go to the philosophers or the commentators for their translation, and have not
the brains to understand them themselves. A silly man reads three letters of

Sanskrit and translates a whole book. They translate the, elements as air, fire,
and so on; if they would go to the commentators, they would find they do not
mean air or anything of the sort.
The Akasha, acted upon by the repeated blows of Prana, produces Vâyu or
vibrations. This Vayu vibrates, and the vibrations growing more and more
rapid result in friction giving rise to heat, Tejas. Then this heat ends in
liquefaction, Âpah. Then that liquid becomes solid. We had ether, and motion,
then came heat, then it became liquefied, and then it condensed into gross
matter; and it goes back in exactly the reverse way. The solid will be liquefied
and will then be converted into a mass of heat, and that will slowly get back
into motion; that motion will stop, and this Kalpa will be destroyed. Then,
again it will come back and again dissolve into ether. Prana cannot work alone
without the help of Akasha. All that we know in the form of motion, vibration,
or thought is a modification of the Prana, and everything that we know in the
shape of matter, either as form or as resistance, is a modification of the
Akasha. The Prana cannot live alone, or act without a medium; when it is pure
Prana, it has the Akasha itself to live in, and when it changes into forces of
nature, say gravitation, or centrifugal force, it must have matter. You have
never seen force without matter or matter without force; what we call force and
matter are simply the gross manifestations of these same things, which, when
superfine, are called Prana and Akasha. Prana you can call in English life, the
vital force; but you must not restrict it to the life of man; at the same time you
must not identify it with Spirit, Atman. So this goes on. Creation cannot have
either a beginning or an end; it is an eternal on-going.
We shall state another position of these old psychologists, which is that all
gross things are the results of fine ones. Everything that is gross is composed
of fine things, which they call the Tanmâtras, the fine particles. I smell a
flower. To smell, something must come in contact with my nose; the flower is
there, but I do not see it move towards me. That which comes from the flower
and in contact with my nose is called the Tanmatra, fine molecules of that
flower. So with heat, light and everything. These Tanmatras can again be
subdivided into atoms. Different philosophers have different theories, and we
know these are only theories. It is sufficient for our purpose to know that
everything gross is composed of things that are very, very fine. We first get the
gross elements which we feel externally, and then come the fine elements with
which the nose, eyes, and ears come in contact. Ether waves touch my eyes; I
cannot see them, yet I know they must come in contact with my eyes before I

can see light.
Here are the eyes, but the eyes do not see. Take away the brain centre; the
eyes will still be there, as also the picture of the outside world complete on the
retinae; yet the eyes will not see. So the eyes are only a secondary instrument,
not the organ of vision. The organ of vision is the nerve-centre in the brain.
Likewise the nose is an instrument, and there is an organ behind it. The senses
are simply the external instruments. It may be said that these different organs,
Indriyas, as they are called in Sanskrit, are the real seats of perception.
It is necessary for the mind to be joined to an organ to perceive. It is a
common experience that we do not hear the clock strike when we happen to be
buried in study. Why? The ear was there, the sound was carried through it to
the brain; yet it was not heard, because the mind did not attach itself to the
organ of hearing.
There is a different organ for each different instrument. For, if one served
for all, we should find that when the mind joined itself to it, all the senses
would be equally active. But it is not so, as we have seen from the instance of
the clock. If there was only one organ for all the instruments, the mind would
see and hear at the same time, would see and hear and smell at the same time,
and it would be impossible for it not to do all these at one and the same time.
Therefore it is necessary that there should be a separate organ for each sense.
This has been borne out by modern physiology. It is certainly possible for us
to hear and see at the same time, but that is because the mind attaches itself
partially to the two centres.
What are the organs made of? We see that the instruments — eyes, nose, and
ears — are made of gross materials. The organs are also made of matter. Just
as the body is composed of gross materials, and manufactures Prana into
different gross forces, so the organs are composed of the fine elements,
Akasha, Vayu, Tejas, etc., and manufacture Prana into the finer forces of
perception. The organs, the Prana functions, the mind and the Buddhi
combined, are called the finer body of man — the Linga or Sukshma Sharira.
The Linga Sharira has a real form because everything material must have a
form.
The mind is called the Manas, the Chitta in Vritti or vibrating, the unsettled
state. If you throw a stone in a lake, first there will be vibration, and then
resistance. For a moment the water will vibrate and then it will react on the
stone. So when any impression comes on the Chitta, it first vibrates a little.
That is called the Manas. The mind carries the impression farther in, and

presents it to the determinative faculty, Buddhi, which reacts. Behind Buddhi is
Ahamkâra, egoism, the self-consciousness which says, “I am”. Behind
Ahamkara is Mahat, intelligence, the highest form of nature’s existence. Each
one is the effect of the succeeding one. In the case of the lake, every blow that
comes to it is from the external world, while in the case of the mind, the blow
may come either from the external or the internal world. Behind the
intelligence is the Self of man, the Purusha, the Atman, the pure, the perfect,
who alone is the seer, and for whom is all this change.
Man looks on all these changes; he himself is never impure; but through
what the Vedantists call Adhyâsa, by reflection, by implication, he seems to be
impure. It is like the appearance of a crystal when a red or a blue flower is
brought before it: the colour is reflected on it, but the crystal itself is pure. We
shall take it for granted that there are many selves, and each self is pure and
perfect; various kinds of gross and fine matter superimpose themselves on the
self and make it multicoloured. Why does nature do all this? Nature is
undergoing all these changes for the development of the soul; all this creation
is for the benefit of the soul, so that it may be free. This immense book which
we call the universe is stretched out before man so that he may read; and he
discovers eventually that he is an omniscient and omnipotent being. I must here
tell you that some of our best psychologists do not believe in God in the sense
in which you believe in Him. The father of our psychology, Kapila, denies the
existence of God. His idea is that a Personal God is quite unnecessary; nature
itself is sufficient to work out the whole of creation. What is called the Design
Theory, he knocked on the head, and said that a more childish theory was never
advanced. But he admits a peculiar kind of God. He says we are all struggling
to get free; and when we become free, we can, as it were, melt away into
nature, only to come out at the beginning of the next cycle and be its ruler. We
come out omniscient and omnipotent beings. In that sense we can be called
Gods; you and I and the humblest beings can be Gods in different cycles. He
says such a God will be temporal; but an eternal God, eternally omnipotent and
ruler of the universe cannot be. If there was such a God, there would be this
difficulty: He must be either a bound spirit or a free one. A God who is
perfectly free would not create: there is no necessity for it. If He were bound,
He would not create, because He could not: He would be powerless. In either
case, there cannot be any omniscient or omnipotent eternal ruler. In our
scriptures, wherever the word God is mentioned, he says, it means those
human beings who have become free.

Kapila does not believe in the unity of all souls. His analysis, so far as it
goes, is simply marvellous. He is the father of Indian thinkers; Buddhism and
other systems are the outcome of his thought.
According to his psychology, all souls can regain their freedom and their
natural rights, which are omnipotence and omniscience. But the question
arises: Where is this bondage? Kapila says it is without beginning. But if it is
without beginning, it must be without end, and we shall never be free. He says
that though bondage is without beginning, it is not of that constant uniform
character as the soul is. In other words, nature (the cause of bondage) is
without beginning and end, but not in the same sense as soul, because nature
has no individuality; it is like a river which gets a fresh body of water every
moment; the sum total of these bodies of water is the river, but the river is not a
constant quantity. Everything in nature is constantly changing, but the soul
never changes; so, as nature is always changing, it is possible for the soul to
come out of its bondage.
The whole of the universe is built upon the same plan as a part of it. So, just
as I have a mind, there is a cosmic mind. As in the individual, so in the
universal. There is the universal gross body; behind that, a universal fine body;
behind that, a universal mind; behind that, a universal egoism, or
consciousness; and behind that, a universal intelligence. And all this is in
nature, the manifestation of nature, not outside of it.
We have the gross bodies from our parents, as also our consciousness. Strict
heredity says my body is a part of my parents’ bodies, the material of my
consciousness and egoism is a part of my parents’. We can add to the little
portion inherited from our parents by drawing upon the universal
consciousness. There is an infinite storehouse of intelligence out of which we
draw what we require; there is an infinite storehouse of mental force in the
universe out of which we are drawing eternally; but the seed must come from
the parents. Our theory is heredity coupled with reincarnation. By the law of
heredity, the reincarnating soul receives from parents the material out of which
to manufacture a man.
Some of the European philosophers have asserted that this world exists
because I exist; and if I do not exist, the world will not exist. Sometimes it is
stated thus: If all the people in the world were to die, and there were no more
human beings, and no animals with powers of perception and intelligence, all
these manifestations would disappear. But these European philosophers do not
know the psychology of it, although they know the principle; modern

philosophy has got only a glimpse of it. This becomes easy of understanding
when looked at from the Sankhya point of view. According to Sankhya, it is
impossible for anything to be, which has not as its material, some portion of
my mind. I do not know this table as it is. An impression from it comes to the
eyes, then to, the Indriya, and then to the mind; and the mind reacts, and that
reaction is what I call the table. It is just the same as throwing a stone in a lake;
the lake throws a wave towards the stone; this wave is what we know. What is
external nobody knows; when I try to know it, it has to become that material
which I furnish. I, with my own mind, have furnished the material for my eyes.
There is something which is outside, which is only, the occasion, the
suggestion, and upon that suggestion I project my mind; and it takes the form
that I see. How do we all see the same things? Because we all have; similar
parts of the cosmic mind. Those who have like minds will see like things, and
those who have not will not see alike.
A Study Of The Sankhya Philosophy
Prakriti is called by the Sânkhya philosophers indiscrete, and defined as the
perfect balance of the materials in it; and it naturally follows that in perfect
balance there cannot be any motion. In the primal state before any
manifestation, when there was no motion but perfect balance, this Prakriti was
indestructible, because decomposition or death comes from instability or
change. Again, according to the Sankhya, atoms are not the primal state. This
universe does not come out of atoms: they may be the secondary or the tertiary
state. The primordial material may form into atoms and become grosser and
bigger things; and as far as modern investigations go, they rather point
towards the same conclusion. For instance, in the modern theory of ether, if
you say ether is atomic, it will not solve anything. To make it clearer, say that
air is composed of atoms, and we know that ether is everywhere,
interpenetrating, omnipresent, and that these air atoms are floating, as it were,
in ether. If ether again be composed of atoms, there will still be spaces between
every two atoms of ether. What fills up these? If you suppose that there is
another ether still finer which does this, there will again be other spaces
between the atoms of that finer ether which require filling up, and so it will be
regressus ad infinitum, what the Sankhya philosophers call the “cause leading
to nothing” So the atomic theory cannot be final. According to Sankhya, nature
is omnipresent, one omnipresent mass of nature, in which are the causes of

everything that exists. What is meant by cause? Cause is the fine state of the
manifested state; the unmanifested state of that which becomes manifested.
What do you mean by destruction? It is reverting to the cause If you have a
piece of pottery and give it a blow, it is destroyed. What is meant by this is that
the effects go back to their own nature, they materials out of which the pottery
was created go back into their original state. Beyond this idea of destruction,
any idea such as annihilation is on the face of it absurd. According to modern
physical science, it can be demonstrated that all destruction means that which
Kapila said ages ago — simply reverting to the cause. Going back to the finer
form is all that is meant by destruction. You know how it can be demonstrated
in a laboratory that matter is indestructible. At this present stage of our
knowledge, if any man stands up and says that matter or this soul becomes
annihilated, he is only making himself, ridiculous; it is only uneducated, silly
people who would advance such a proposition; and it is curious that modern
knowledge coincides with what those old philosophers taught. It must be so,
and that is the proof of truth. They proceeded in their inquiry, taking up mind
as the basis; they analysed the mental part of this universe and came to certain
conclusions, which we, analysing the physical part, must come to, for they both
must lead to the same centre.
You must remember that the first manifestation of this Prakriti in the cosmos
is what the Sankhya calls “Mahat”. We may call it intelligence — the great
principle, its literal meaning. The first change in Prakriti is this intelligence; I
would not translate it by self-consciousness, because that would be wrong.
Consciousness is only a part of this intelligence. Mahat is universal. It covers
all the grounds of sub-consciousness, consciousness, and super-consciousness;
so any one state of consciousness, as applied to this Mahat, would not be
sufficient. In nature, for instance, you note certain changes going on before
your eyes which you see and understand, but there are other changes, so much
finer, that no human perception can catch them. They are from the same cause,
the same Mahat is making these changes. Out of Mahat comes universal
egoism. These are all substance. There is no difference between matter and
mind, except in degree. The substance is the same in finer or grosser form; one
changes into the other, and this exactly coincides with the conclusions of
modern physiological research. By believing in the teaching that the mind is
not separate from the brain, you will be saved from much fighting and
struggling. Egoism again changes into two varieties. In one variety it changes
into the organs. Organs are of two kinds, organs of sensation and organs of

reaction. They are not the eyes or the ears, but back of those are what you call
brain-centres, and nerve-centres, and so on. This egoism, this matter or
substance, becomes changed, and out of this material are manufactured these
centres. Of the same substance is manufactured the other variety, the
Tanmatras, fine particles of matter, which strike our organs of perception and
bring about sensations. You cannot perceive them but only know they are there.
Out of the Tanmatras is manufactured the gross matter — earth, water, and all
the things that we see and feel. I want to impress this on your mind. It is very,
hard to grasp it, because in Western countries the ideas are so queer about
mind and matter. It is hard to get those impressions out of our brains. I myself
had a tremendous difficulty, being educated in Western philosophy in my
boyhood. These are all cosmic things. Think of this universal extension of
matter, unbroken, one substance, undifferentiated, which is the first state of
everything, and which begins to change in the same way as milk becomes curd.
This first change is called Mahat. The substance Mahat changes into the
grosser matter called egoism. The third change is manifested as universal
sense-organs, and universal fine particles, and these last again combine and
become this gross universe which with eyes, nose, and ears, we see, smell, and
hear. This is the cosmic plan according to the Sankhya, and what is in the
cosmos must also be microcosmic. Take an individual man. He has first a part
of undifferentiated nature in him, and that material nature in him becomes
changed into this Mahat, a small particle of this universal intelligence, and this
particle of universal intelligence in him becomes changed into egoism, and
then into the sense-organs and the fine particles of matter which combine and
manufacture his body. I want this to be clear, because it is the stepping-stone to
Sankhya, and it is absolutely necessary for you to understand it, because this is
the basis of the philosophy of the whole world. There is no philosophy in the
world that is not indebted to Kapila. Pythagoras came to India and studied this
philosophy, and that was the beginning of the philosophy of the Greeks. Later,
it formed the Alexandrian school, and still later, the Gnostic. It became divided
into two; one part went to Europe and Alexandria, and the other remained in
India; and out of this, the system of Vyasa was developed. The Sankhya
philosophy of Kapila was the first rational system that the world ever saw.
Every metaphysician in the world must pay homage to him. I want to impress
on your mind that we are bound to listen to him as the great father of
philosophy. This wonderful man, the most ancient of philosophers, is
mentioned even in the Shruti: “O Lord, Thou who produced the sage Kapila in

the Beginning.” How wonderful his perceptions were, and if there is ant proof
required of the extraordinary power of the perception of Yogis, such men are
the proof. They had no microscopes or telescopes. Yet how fine their
perception was, how perfect and wonderful their analysis of things!
I will here point out the difference between Schopenhauer and the Indian
philosophy. Schopenhauer says that desire, or will, is the cause of everything. It
is the will to exist that make us manifest, but we deny this. The will is identical
with the motor nerves. When I see an object there is no will; when its
sensations are carried to the brain, there comes the reaction, which says “Do
this”, or “Do not do this”, and this state of the ego-substance is what is called
will. There cannot be a single particle of will which is not a reaction. So many
things precede will. It is only a manufactured something out of the ego, and the
ego is a manufacture of something still higher — the intelligence — and that
again is a modification of the indiscrete nature. That was the Buddhistic idea,
that whatever we see is the will. It is psychologically entirely wrong, because
will can only be identified with the motor nerves. If you take out the motor
nerves, a man has no will whatever. This fact, as is perhaps well known to you,
has been found out after a long series of experiments made with the lower
animals.
We will take up this question. It is very important to understand this question
of Mahat in man, the great principle, the intelligence. This intelligence itself is
modified into what we call egoism, and this intelligence is the cause of all the
powers in the body. It covers the whole ground, sub-consciousness,
consciousness, and super-consciousness. What are these three states? The subconscious state we find in animals, which we call instinct. This is almost
infallible, but very limited. Instinct rarely fails. An animal almost instinctively
knows a poisonous herb from an edible one, but its instinct is very limited. As
soon as something new comes, it is blind. It works like a machine. Then comes
a higher state of knowledge which is fallible and makes mistakes often, but has
a larger scope, although it is slow, and this you call reason. It is much larger
than instinct, but instinct is surer than reason. There are more chances of
mistakes in reasoning than in instinct. There is a still higher state of the mind,
the super-conscious, which belongs only to Yogis, to men who have cultivated
it. This is infallible and much more unlimited in its scope than reason. This is
the highest state. So we must remember, this Mahat is the real cause of all that
is here, that which manifests itself in various ways, covers the whole ground of
sub-conscious, conscious, and super-conscious, the three states in which

knowledge exists.
Now comes a delicate question which is being always asked. If a perfect God
created the universe, why is there imperfection in it? What we call the universe
is what we see, and that is only this little plane of consciousness and reason;
beyond that we do not see at all. Now the very question is an impossible one. If
I take only a small portion out of a mass of something and look at it, it seems
to be inharmonious. Naturally. The universe is inharmonious because we make
it so. How? What is reason? What is knowledge? Knowledge is finding the
association about things. You go into the street and see a man and say, I know
this is a man; because you remember the impressions on your mind, the marks
on the Chitta. You have seen many men, and each one has made an impression
on your mind; and as you see this man, you refer this to your store and see
many similar pictures there; and when you see them, you are satisfied, and you
put this new one with the rest. When a new impression comes and it has
associations in your mind, you are satisfied; and this state of association is
called knowledge. Knowledge is, therefore, pigeon-holing one experience with
the already existing fund of experience, and this is one of the great proofs of
the fact that you cannot have any knowledge until you have already a fund in
existence. If you are without experience, as some European philosophers think,
and that your mind is a tabula rasa to begin with, you cannot get any
knowledge, because the very fact of knowledge is the recognition of the new
by means of associations already existing in the mind. There must be a store at
hand to which to refer a new impression. Suppose a child is born into this
world without such a fund, it would be impossible for him ever to get any
knowledge. Therefore, the child must have been previously in a state in which
he had a fund, and so knowledge is eternally increasing. Slow me a way of
getting round this argument. It is a mathematical fact. Some Western schools of
philosophy also hold that there cannot be any knowledge without a fund of past
knowledge. They have framed the idea that the child is born with knowledge.
These Western philosophers say that the impressions with which the child
comes into the world are not due to the child’s past, but to the experiences of
his forefathers: it is only hereditary transmission. Soon they will find out that
this idea is all wrong; some German philosophers are now giving hard blows
to these heredity ideas. Heredity is very good, but incomplete, it only explains
the physical side. How do you explain the environments influencing us? Many
causes produce one effect. Environment is one of the modifying effects. We
make our own environment: as our past is, so we find the present environment.

A drunken man naturally gravitates to the lowest slums of the city.
You understand what is meant by knowledge. Knowledge is pigeon-holing a
new impression with old ones, recognising a new impression. What is meant
by recognition? Finding associations with similar impressions that one already
has. Nothing further is meant by knowledge. If that is the case, if knowledge
means finding the associations, then it must be that to know anything we have
to set the whole series of its similars. Is it not so? Suppose you take a pebble; to
find the association, you have to see the whole series of pebbles similes to it.
But with our perception of the universe as a whole we cannot do that, because
in the pigeon-hole of our mind there is only one single record of the
perception, we have no other perception of the same nature or class, we cannot
compare it with any other. We cannot refer it to its associations. This bit of the
universe, cut off by our consciousness, is a startling new thing, because we
have not been able to find its associations. Therefore, we are struggling with it,
and thinking it horrible, wicked, and bad; we may sometimes think it is good,
but we always think it is imperfect. It is only when we find its associations that
the universe can be known. We shall recognise it when we go beyond the
universe and consciousness, and then the universe will stand explained. Until
we can do that, all the knocking of our heads against a wall will never explain
the universe, because knowledge is the finding of similars, and this conscious
plane only gives us one single perception of it. So with our idea of God. All
that we see of God is only a part just as we see only one portion of the
universe, and all the rest is beyond human cognition. “I, the universal; so great
am I that even this universe is but a part of Me.” That is why we see God as
imperfect, and do not understand Him. The only way to understand Him and the
universe is to go beyond reason, beyond consciousness. “When thou goest
beyond the heard and the hearing, the thought and the thinking, then alone wilt
thou come to Truth.” “Go thou beyond the scriptures, because they teach only
up to nature, up to the three qualities.” When we go beyond them, we find the
harmony, and not before.
The microcosm and the macrocosm are built on exactly the same plan, and
in the microcosm we know only one part, the middle part. We know neither the
sub-conscious, nor the super-conscious. We know the conscious only. If a man
stands up and says, “I am a sinner”, he makes an untrue statement because he
does not know himself. He is the most ignorant of men; of himself he knows
only one part, because his knowledge covers only a part of the ground he is on.
So with this universe, it is possible to know only a part of it with the reason,

not the whole of it; for the sub-conscious, the conscious and the superconscious, the individual Mahat and the universal Mahat, and all the subsequent
modifications, constitute the universe.
What makes nature (Prakriti) change? We see so far that everything, all
Prakriti, is Jada, insentient. It is all compound and insentient. Wherever there is
law, it is proof that the region of its play is insentient. Mind, intelligence, will,
and everything else is insentient. But they are all reflecting the sentiency, the
“Chit” of some being who is beyond all this, whom the Sankhya philosophers
call “Purusha”. The Purusha is the unwitting cause of all the changes in the
universe. That is to say, this Purusha, taking Him in the universal sense, is the
God of the universe. It is said that the will of the Lord created the universe. It is
very good as a common expression, but we see it cannot be true. How could it
be will? Will is the third or fourth manifestation in nature. Many things exist
before it, and what created them? Will is a compound, and everything that is a
compound is a product of nature. Will, therefore, could not create nature. So,
to say that the will of the Lord created the universe is meaningless. Our will
only covers a little portion of self-consciousness and moves our brain. It is not
will that is working your body or that is working the universe. This body is
being moved by a power of which will is only a manifestation in one part.
Likewise in the universe there is will, but that is only one part of the universe.
The whole of the universe is not guided by will; that is why we cannot explain
it by the will theory. Suppose I take it for granted that it is will moving the
body, then, when I find I cannot work it at will, I begin to fret and fume. It is my
fault, because I had no right to take the will theory for granted. In the same
way, if I take the universe and think it is will that moves it and find things which
do not coincide, it is my fault. So the Purusha is not will; neither can it be
intelligence, because intelligence itself is a compound. There cannot be any
intelligence without some sort of matter corresponding to the brain. Wherever
there is intelligence, there must be something akin to that matter which we call
brain which becomes lumped together into a particular form and serves the
purpose of the brain. Wherever there is intelligence, there must be that matter
in some form or other. But intelligence itself is a compound. What then is this
Purusha? It is neither intelligence nor will, but it is the cause of all these. It is
its presence that sets them all going and combining. It does not mix with nature;
it is not intelligence, or Mahat; but the Self, the pure, is Purusha. “I am the
witness, and through my witnessing, nature is producing; all that is sentient and
all that is insentient.”

What is this sentiency in nature? We find intelligence is this sentiency which
is called Chit. The basis of sentiency is in the Purusha, it is the nature of
Purusha. It is that which cannot be explained but which is the cause of all that
we call knowledge. Purusha is not consciousness, because consciousness is a
compound; buts whatever is light and good in consciousness belongs to
Purusha. Purusha is not conscious, but whatever is light in intelligence belongs
to Purusha. Sentiency is in the Purusha, but the Purusha is not intelligent, not
knowing. The Chit in the Purusha plus Prakriti is what we see around us.
Whatever is pleasure and happiness and light in the universe belongs to
Purusha; but it is a compound, because it is Purusha plus Prakriti. “Wherever
there is any happiness, wherever there is any bliss, there is a spark of that
immortality which is God.” “Purusha is the; great attraction of the universe;
though untouched by and unconnected with the universe, yet it attracts the
whole; universe.” You see a man going after gold, because behind it is a spark
of the Purusha though mixed up with a good deal of dirt. When a man loves his
children or a woman her husband, what is the attracting power? A spark of
Purusha behind them. It is there, only mixed up with “dirt”. Nothing else can
attract. “In this world of insentiency the Purusha alone is sentient.” This is the
Purusha of the Sankhya. As such, it necessarily follows that the Purusha must
be omnipresent. That which is not omnipresent must be limited. All limitations
are caused; that which is caused must have a beginning and end. If the Purusha
is limited, it will die, will not be free, will not be final, but must have some
cause. Therefore it is omnipresent. According to Kapila, there are many
Purushas; not one, but an infinite number of them. You and I have each of us
one, and so has everyone else; an infinite number of circles, each one infinite,
running through this universe. The Purusha is neither mind nor matter, the
reflex from it is all that we know. We are sure if it is omnipresent it has neither
death nor birth. Nature is casting her shadow upon it, the shadow of birth and
death, but it is by its nature pure. So far we have found the philosophy of the
Sankhya wonderful.
Next we shall take up the proofs against it. So far the analysis is perfect, the
psychology incontrovertible. We find by the division of the senses into organs
and instruments that they are not simple, but compound; by dividing egoism
into sense and matter, we find that this is also material and that Mahat is also a
state of matter, and finally we find the Purusha. So far there is no objection. But
if we ask the Sankhya the question, “Who created nature?” — the Sankhya says
that the Purusha and the Prakriti are uncreate and omnipresent, and that of this

Purusha there is an infinite number. We shall have to controvert these
propositions, and find a better solution, and by so doing we shall come to
Advaitism. Our first objection is, how can there be these two infinites? Then
our argument will be that the Sankhya is not a perfect generalization, and that
we have not found in it a perfect solution. And then we shall see how the
Vedantists grope out of all these difficulties and reach a perfect solution, and
yet all the glory really belongs to the Sankhya. It is very easy to give a
finishing touch to a building when it is constructed.
Sankhya And Vedanta
I shall give you a résumé of the Sânkhya philosophy, through which we have
been going. We, in this lecture, want to find where its defects are, and where
Vedanta comes in and supplements it. You must remember that according to
Sankhya philosophy, nature is the cause of all these manifestations which we
call thought, intellect, reason, love, hatred, touch, taste, and matter. Everything
is from nature. This nature consists of three sorts of elements, called Sattva,
Rajas, and Tamas. These are not qualities, but elements, the materials out of
which the whole universe is evolved. In the beginning of a cycle these remain
in equilibrium; and when creation comes, they begin to combine and
recombine and manifest as the universe. The first manifestation is what the
Sankhya calls the Mahat or Intelligence, and out of that comes consciousness.
According to Sankhya, this is an element (Tattva). And out of consciousness
are evolved Manas or mind, the organs of the senses, and the Tanmâtras
(particles of sound, touch, etc.). All the fine particles are evolved from
consciousness, and out of these fine particles come the gross elements which
we call matter. The Tanmatras cannot be perceived; but when they become
gross particles, we can feel and sense them.
The Chitta, in its threefold function of intelligence, consciousness, and
mind, works and manufactures the forces called Prâna. You must at once get
rid of the idea that Prana is breath. Breath is one effect of Prana. By Prana are
meant the nervous forces governing and moving the whole body, which also
manifest themselves as thought. The foremost and most obvious manifestation
of Prana is the breathing motion. Prana acts upon air, and not air upon it.
Controlling the breathing motion is prânâyâma. Pranayama is practised to get
mastery over this motion; the end is not merely to control the breath or to
make the lungs strong. That is Delsarte, not Pranayama. These Pranas are the

vital forces which manipulate the whole body, while they in their turn are
manipulated by other organs in the body, which are called mind or internal
organs. So far so good. The psychology is very clear and most precise; and yet
it is the oldest rational thought in the world! Wherever there is any philosophy
or rational thought, it owes something or other to Kapila. Pythagoras learnt it
in India, and taught it in Greece. Later on Plato got an inkling of it; and still
later the Gnostics carried the thought to Alexandria, and from there it came to
Europe. So wherever there is any attempt at psychology or philosophy, the
great father of it is this man, Kapila. So far we see that his psychology is
wonderful; but we shall have to differ with him on some points, as we go on.
We find that the basic principle on which Kapila works, is evolution. He makes
one thing evolve out of another, because his very definition of causation is “the
cause reproduced in another form,” and because the whole universe, so far as
we see it, is progressive and evolving. We see clay; in another form, we call it
a pitcher. Clay was the cause and the pitcher the effect. Beyond this we cannot
have any idea of causation. Thus this whole universe is evolved out of a
material, out of Prakriti or nature. Therefore, the universe cannot be
essentially different from its cause. According to Kapila, from undifferentiated
nature to thought or intellect, not one of them is what he calls the “Enjoyer” or
“Enlightener”. Just as is a lump of clay, so is a lump of mind. By itself the mind
has no light; but ate see it reasons. Therefore there must be some one behind it,
whose light is percolating through Mahat and consciousness, and subsequent
modifications, and this is what Kapila calls the Purusha, the Self of the
Vedantin. According to Kapila, the Purusha is a simple entity, not a compound;
he is immaterial, the only one who is immaterial, and all these various
manifestations are material. I see a black-board. First, the external instruments
will bring that sensation to the nerve-centre, to the Indriya according to Kapila;
from the centre it will go to the mind and make an impression; the mind will
present it to the Buddhi, but Buddhi cannot act; the action comes, as it were,
from the Purusha behind. These, so to speak, are all his servants, bringing the
sensations to him, and he, as it were, gives the orders, reacts, is the enjoyer, the
perceiver, the real One, the King on his throne, the Self of man, who is
immaterial. Because he is immaterial, it necessarily follows that he must be
infinite, he cannot have any limitation whatever. Each one of the Purushas is
omnipresent; each one of us is omnipresent, but we can act only through the
Linga Sharira, the fine body. The mind, the self-consciousness, the organs, and
the vital forces compose the fine body or sheath, what in Christian philosophy

is called the spiritual body of man. It is this body that gets salvation, or
punishment, or heaven, that incarnates and reincarnates, because we see from
the very beginning that the going and the coming of the Purusha or soul are
impossible. Motion means going or coming, and what goes or comes from
one place to another cannot be omnipresent. Thus far we see from Kapila’s
psychology that the soul is infinite, and that the soul is the only thing which is
not composed of nature. He is the only one that is outside of nature, but he has
got bound by nature, apparently. Nature is around him, and he has identified
himself with it. He thinks, “I am the Linga Sharira”, “I am the gross matter, the
gross body”, and as such he enjoys pleasure and pain, but they do not really
belong to him, they belong to this Linga Sharira or the fine body.
The meditative state is called always the highest state by the Yogi, when it is
neither a passive nor an active state; in it you approach nearest to the Purusha.
The soul has neither pleasure nor pain; it is the witness of everything, the
eternal witness of all work, but it takes no fruits from any work. As the sun is
the cause of sight of every eye, but is not itself affected by any defects in the
eye or as when a crystal has red or blue flowers placed before it, the crystal
looks red or blue, and yet it is neither; so, the soul is neither passive nor active,
it is beyond both. The nearest way of expressing this state of the soul is that it is
meditation. This is Sankhya philosophy.
Next, Sankhya says, that the manifestation of nature is for the soul; all
combinations are for some third person. The combinations which you call
nature, these constant changes are going on for the enjoyment of the soul, for
its liberation, that it may gain all this experience from the lowest to the highest.
When it has gained it, the soul finds it was never in nature, that it was entirely
separate, that it is indestructible, that it cannot go and come; that going to
heaven and being born again were in nature, and not in the soul. Thus the soul
becomes free. All nature is working for the enjoyment and experience of the
soul. It is getting this experience in order to reach the goal, and that goal is
freedom. But the souls are many according to the Sankhya philosophy. There is
an infinite number of souls. The other conclusion of Kapila is that there is no
God as the Creator of the universe. Nature is quite sufficient by itself to
account for everything. God is not necessary, says the Sankhya.
The Vedanta says that the Soul is in its nature Existence absolute, Knowledge
absolute, Bliss absolute. But these are not qualities of the Soul: they are one,
not three, the essence of the Soul; and it agrees with the Sankhya in thinking
that intelligence belongs to nature, inasmuch as it comes through nature. The

Vedanta also shows that what is called intelligence is a compound. For instance,
let us examine our perceptions. I see a black-board. How does the knowledge
come? What the German philosophers call “the thing-in-itself” of the
blackboard is unknown, I can never know it. Let us call it x. The black-board x
acts on my mind, and the mind reacts. The mind is like a lake. Throw a stone in
a lake and a reactionary wave comes towards the stone; this wave is not like the
stone at all, it is a wave. The black-board x is like a stone which strikes the
mind and the mind throws up a wave towards it, and this wave is what we call
the black-board. I see you. You as reality are unknown and unknowable. You
are x and you act upon my mind, and the mind throws a wave in the direction
from which the impact comes, and that wave is what I call Mr. or Mrs. So-andso. There are two elements in the perception, one coming from outside and the
other from inside, and the combination of these two, x + mind, is our external
universe. All knowledge is by reaction. In the case of a whale it has been
determined by calculation how long after its tail is struck, its mind reacts and
the whale feels the pain. Similar is the case with internal perception. The real
self within me is also unknown and unknowable. Let us call it y. When I know
myself as so-and-so, it is y + the mind. That y strikes a blow on the mind. So
our whole world is x + mind (external), and y + mind (internal), x and y
standing for the thing-in-itself behind the external and the internal worlds
respectively.
According to Vedanta, the three fundamental factors of consciousness are, I
exist, I know, and I am blessed The idea that I have no want, that I am restful,
peaceful, that nothing can disturb me, which comes from time to time, is the
central fact of our being, the basic principle of our life; and when it becomes
limited, and becomes a compound, it manifests itself as existence phenomenal,
knowledge phenomenal, and love. Every man exists, and every man must
know, and every man is mad for love. He cannot help loving. Through all
existence, from the lowest to the highest, all must love. The y, the internal
thing-in-itself, which, combining with mind, manufactures existence,
knowledge, and love, is called by the Vedantists. Existence absolute,
Knowledge absolute, Bliss absolute. That real existence is limitless, unmixed,
uncombined, knows no change, is the free soul; when it gets mixed up,
muddled up, as it were, with the mind, it becomes what we call individual
existence. It is plant life, animal life, human life, just as universal space is cut
off in a room, in a jar, and so on. And that real knowledge is not what we
know, not intuition, nor reason, nor instinct. When that degenerates and is

confused, we call it intuition; when it degenerates more, we call it reason; and
when it degenerates still more, we call it instinct. That knowledge itself is
Vijnâna, neither intuition, nor reason nor instinct. The nearest expression for it
is all-knowingness. There is no limit to it, no combination in it. That bliss,
when it gets clouded over, we call love, attraction for gross bodies or fine
bodies, or for ideas. This is only a distorted manifestation of that blessedness.
Absolute Existence, absolute Knowledge, and absolute Blessedness are not
qualities of the soul, but the essence; there is no difference between them and
the soul. And the three are one; we see the one thing in three different aspects.
They are beyond all relative knowledge. That eternal knowledge of the Self
percolating through the brain of man becomes his intuition, reason, and so on.
Its manifestation varies according to the medium through which it shines. As
soul, there is no difference between man and the lowest animal, only the
latter ’s brain is less developed and the manifestation through it which we call
instinct is very dull. In a man the brain is much finer, so the manifestation is
much clearer, and in the highest man it becomes entirely clear. So with
existence; the existence which we know, the limited sphere of existence, is
simply a reflection of that real existence which is the nature of the soul. So with
bliss; that which we call love or attraction is but the rejection of the eternal
blessedness of the Self. With manifestation comes limitation, but the
unmanifested, the essential nature of the soul, is unlimited; to that blessedness
there is no limit. But in love there is limitation. I love you one day, I hate you
the next. My love increases one day and decreases the next, because it is only a
manifestation.
The first point we will contend with Kapila is his idea of God. Just as the
series of modifications of Prakriti, beginning with the individual intellect and
ending with the individual body, require a Purusha behind, as the ruler and
governor, so, in the Cosmos, the universal intellect, the universal egoism, the
universal mind, all universal fine and gross materials, must have a ruler and
governor. How will the cosmic series become complete without the universal
Purusha behind them all as the ruler and governor? If you deny a universal
Purusha behind the cosmic series, we deny your Purusha behind the individual
series. If it be true that behind the series of graded, evolved individual
manifestations, there stands One that is beyond them all, the Purusha who is not
composed of matter, the very same logic will apply to the case of universal
manifestations. This Universal Self which is beyond the universal
modifications of Prakriti is what is called Ishwara, the Supreme Ruler, God.

Now comes the more important point of difference. Can there be more than
one Purusha? The Purusha, we have seen, is omnipresent and infinite. The
omnipresent, the infinite, cannot be two. If there are two infinites A and B, the
infinite A would limit the infinite B, because the infinite B is not the infinite A,
and the infinite A is not the infinite B. Difference in identity means exclusion,
and exclusion means limitation. Therefore, A and B, limiting each other, cease
to be infinites. Hence, there can be but one infinite, that is, one Purusha.
Now we will take up our x and y and show they are one. We have shown how
what we call the external world is x + mind, and the internal world y + mind; x
and y are both quantities unknown and unknowable. All difference is due to
time, space, and causation. These are the constituent elements of the mind. No
mentality is possible without them. You can never think without time, you can
never imagine anything without space, and you can never have anything
without causation. These are the forms of the mind. Take them away, and the
mind itself does not exist. All difference is, therefore, due to the mind.
According to Vedanta, it is the mind, its forms, that have limited x and y
apparently and made them appear as external and internal worlds. But x and y,
being both beyond the mind, are without difference and hence one. We cannot
attribute any quality to them, because qualities are born of the mind. That which
is qualityless must be one; x is without qualities, it only takes qualities of the
mind; so does y; therefore these x and y are one. The whole universe is one.
There is only one Self in the universe, only One Existence, and that One
Existence, when it passes through the forms of time, space, and causation, is
called by different names, Buddhi, fine matter, gross matter, all mental and
physical forms. Everything in the universe is that One, appearing in various
forms. When a little part of it comes, as it were, into this network of time,
space, and causation, it takes forms; take off the network, and it is all one.
Therefore in the Advaita philosophy, the whole universe is all one in the Self
which is called Brahman. That Self when it appears behind the universe is
called God. The same Self when it appears behind this little universe, the body,
is the soul. This very soul, therefore, is the Self in man. There is only one
Purusha, the Brahman of the Vedanta; God and man, analysed, are one in It.
The universe is you yourself, the unbroken you; you are throughout the
universe. “In all hands you work, through all mouths you eat, through all
nostrils you breathe through all minds you think.” The whole universe is you;
the universe is your body; you are the universe both formed and unformed.
You are the soul of the universe and its body also. You are God, you are the

angels, you are man, you are animals, you are the plants, you are the minerals,
you are everything; the manifestation of everything is you. Whatever exists is
you. You are the Infinite. The Infinite cannot be divided. It can have no parts,
for each part would be infinite, and then the part would be identical with the
whole, which is absurd. Therefore the idea that you are Mr. So-and-so can
never be true; it is a day-dream. Know this and be free. This is the Advaita
conclusion. “I am neither the body, nor the organs, nor am I the mind; I am
Existence, Knowledge, and Bliss absolute; I am He.” This is true knowledge;
all reason and intellect, and everything else is ignorance. Where is knowledge
for me, for I am knowledge itself! Where is life for me, for I am life itself! I
am sure I live, for I am life, the One Being, and nothing exists except through
me, and in me, and as me. I am manifested through the elements, but I am the
free One. Who seeks freedom? Nobody. If you think that you are bound, you
remain bound; you make your own bondage. If you know that you are free,
you are free this moment. This is knowledge, knowledge of freedom. Freedom
is the goal of all nature.
The Goal
(Delivered in San Francisco, March 27, 1900)
(Reprinted from the Vedanta and the West, May-June 1958. The editors of the Magazine published it
as it was recorded, adding certain words (in square brackets) to maintain the continuity of thought, and
periods to indicate omissions that might have occurred in recording. — Ed.)

We find that man, as it were, is always surrounded by something greater
than himself, and he is trying to grasp the meaning of this. Man will ever [seek]
the highest ideal. He knows that it exists and that religion is the search after the
highest ideal. At first all his searches were in the external plane — placed in
heaven, in different places — just according to [his grasp] of the total nature of
man.
[Later,] man began to look at himself a little closer and began to find out that
the real “me” was not the “me” that he stands for ordinarily. As he appears to
the senses is not the same as he really is. He began to [search] inside of
himself, and found out that . . . the same ideal he [had placed] outside of himself
is all the time within; what he was worshipping outside was his own real inner
nature. The difference between dualism and monism is that when the ideal is
put outside [of oneself], it is dualism. When God is [sought] within, it is
monism.

First, the old question of why and wherefore . . . How is it that man became
limited? How did the Infinite become finite, the pure become impure? In the
first place, you must never forget that this question can never be answered [by]
any dualistic hypothesis.
Why did God create the impure universe? Why is man so miserable, made
by a perfect, infinite, merciful Father? Why this heaven and earth, looking at
which we get our conception of law? Nobody can imagine anything that he has
not seen.
All the tortures we feel in this life, we put in another place and that is our
hell . . . .
Why did the infinite God make this world? [The dualist says:] Just as the
potter makes pots. God the potter; we the pots. . . . In more philosophical
language the question is: How is it taken for granted that the real nature of man
is pure, perfect, and infinite? This is the one difficulty found in any system of
monism. Everything else is clean and clear. This question cannot be answered.
The monists say the question itself is a contradiction.
Take the system of dualism — the question is asked why God created the
world. This is contradictory. Why? Because — what is the idea of God? He is a
being who cannot be acted upon by anything outside.
You and I are not free. I am thirsty. There is something called thirst, over
which I have no control, [which] forces me to drink water. Every action of my
body and even every thought of my mind is forced out of me. I have got to do
it. That is why I am bound . . . . I am forced to do this, to have this, and so on . . .
. And what is meant by why and wherefore? [Being subject to external forces.]
Why do you drink water? Because thirst forces you. You are a slave. You never
do anything of your own will because you are forced to do everything. Your
only motive for action is some force. . . .
The earth, by itself, would never move unless something forced it. Why
does the light burn? It does not burn unless somebody comes and strikes a
match. Throughout nature, everything is bound. Slavery, slavery! To be in
harmony with nature is [slavery]. What is there in being the slave of nature and
living in a golden cage? The greatest law and order is in the [knowledge that
man is essentially free and divine] Now we see that the question why and
wherefore can only be asked [in ignorance]. I can only be forced to do
something through something else.
[You say] God is free. Again you ask the question why God creates the
world. You contradict yourself. The meaning of God is entirely free will. The

question put in logical language is this: What forced Him, who can never be
forced by anybody, to create the world? You say in the same question, What
forced Him? The question is nonsense. He is infinite by His very nature; He is
free. We shall answer questions when you can ask them in logical language.
Reason will tell you that there is only one Reality, nothing else. Wherever
dualism has risen, monism came to a head and drove it out.
There is only one difficulty in understanding this. Religion is a commonsense, everyday thing. The man in the street knows it if you put it in his
language and not [if it is put] in a philosopher ’s language. It is a common thing
in human nature to [project itself]. Think of your feeling with the child. [You
identify yourself with it. Then] you have two bodies. [Similarly] you can feel
through your husband’s mind Where can you stop? You can feel in infinite
bodies.
Nature is conquered by man every day. As a race, man is manifesting his
power. Try in imagination to put a limit to this power in man. You admit that
man as a race has infinite power, has [an] infinite body. The only question is
what you are. Are you the race or one [individual]? The moment you isolate
yourself, everything hurts you. The moment you expand and feel for others,
you gain help. The selfish man is the most miserable in the world. The happiest
is the man who is not at all selfish. He has become the whole creation, the
whole race and God [is] within him. . . . So in dualism — Christian, Hindu, and
all religions — the code of ethics . . . . is: Do not be selfish . . . . things for
others! Expand! . . . .
The ignorant can be made to understand [this] very easily, and the learned
can be made to understand still more easily. But the man who has just got a
speck of learning, him God himself cannot make understand. [The truth is,]
you are not separate [from this universe]; Just as your Spirit] is [not] separate
from the rest of you. If [not] so, you could not see anything, could not feel
anything. Our bodies are simply little whirlpools in the ocean of matter. Life is
taking a turn and passing on, in another form . . . . The sun, the moon, the stars,
you and I are mere whirlpools. Why did I select [a particular mind as mine? It
is] simply a mental whirlpool in the ocean of mind.
How else is it possible that my vibration reaches you just now? If you throw
a stone in the lake, it raises a vibration and [that stirs] the water into vibration. I
throw my mind into the state of bliss and the tendency is to raise the same bliss
in your mind. How often in your mind or heart [you have thought something]
and without [verbal] communication, [others have got your thought]?

Everywhere we are one. . . . That is what we never understand. The whole
[universe] is composed of time, space, and causation. And God [appears as this
universe]. . . . When did nature begin? When you [forgot your true nature and]
became [bound by time, space, and causation].
This is the [rotating] circle of your bodies and yet that is your infinite
nature. . . . That is certainly nature — time, space, and causation. That is all that
is meant by nature. Time began when you began to think. Space began when
you got the body; otherwise there cannot be any space. Causation began when
you became limited. We have to have some sort of answer. There is the answer.
[Our limitation] is play. Just for the fun of it. Nothing binds you; nothing
forces [you. You were] never bound. We are all acting our parts in this [play]
of our own invention.
But let us bring another question about individuality. Some people are so
afraid of losing their individuality. Wouldn’t it be better for the pig to lose his
pig-individuality if he can become God? Yes. But the poor pig does not think
so at the time. Which state is my individuality? When I was a baby sprawling
on the floor trying to swallow my thumb? Was that the individuality I should be
sorry to lose? Fifty years hence I shall look upon this present state and laugh,
just as I [now] look upon the baby state. Which of these individualities shall I
keep ? . . .
We are to understand what is meant by this individuality. . . . [There are two
opposite tendencies:] one is the protection of the individuality, the other is the
intense desire to sacrifice the individuality. . . . The mother sacrifices all her
own will for the needy baby. . . . When she carries the baby in her arms, the call
of individuality, of self-preservation is no more heard. She will eat the worst
food, but her children will have the best. So for all the people we love we are
ready to die.
[On the one hand] we are struggling hard to keep up this individuality; on
the other hand, trying to kill it. With what result? Tom Brown may struggle
hard. He is [fighting] for his individuality. Tom dies and there is not a ripple
anywhere upon the surface of the earth. There was a Jew born nineteen hundred
years ago, and he never moved a finger to keep his individuality. . . . Think of
that! That Jew never struggled to protect his individuality. That is why he
became the greatest in the world. This is what the world does not know.
In time we are to be individuals. But in what sense? What is the individuality
of man? Not Tom Brown, but God in man. That is the [true] individuality. The
more man has approached that, the more he has given up his false individuality.

The more he tries to collect and gain everything [for himself], the less he is an
individual. The less he has thought of [himself], the more he has sacrificed all
individuality during his lifetime, . . . the more he is an individual. This is one
secret the world does not understand.
We must first understand what is meant by individuality. It is attaining the
ideal. You are man now, [or] you are woman. You will change all the time. Can
you stop? Do you want to keep your minds as they are now — the angels,
hatreds, jealousies, quarrels, all the thousand and one things in the mind? Do
you mean to say that you will keep them? . . . You cannot stop anywhere . . .
until perfect conquest has been achieved, until you are pure and you are
perfect.
You have no more anger when you are all love, bliss, infinite existence. . . .
Which of your bodies will you keep? You cannot stop anywhere until you
come to life that never ends. Infinite life! You stop there. You have a little
knowledge now and are always trying to get more. Where will you stop?
Nowhere, until you become one with life itself. . . .
Many want pleasure [as] the goal. For that pleasure they seek only the senses.
On the higher planes much pleasure is to be sought. Then on spiritual planes.
Then in himself — God within him. The man whose pleasure is outside of
[himself] becomes unhappy when that outside thing goes. You cannot depend
for this pleasure upon anything in this universe. If all my pleasures are in
myself, I must have pleasure there all the time because I can never lose my
Self. . . . Mother, father, child, wife, body, wealth — everything I can lose
except my self . . . bliss in the Self All desire is contained in the Self. . . . This. is
individuality which never changes, and this is perfect.
. . . And how to get it? They find what the great souls of this world — all
great men and women — found [through sustained discrimination]. . . . What of
these dualistic theories of twenty gods, thirty gods? It does not matter. They all
had the one truth, that this false individuality must go. . . . So this ego — the
less there is of it, the nearer I am to that which I really am: the universal body.
The less I think of my own individual mind, the nearer I am to that universal
mind. The less I think of my own soul, the nearer I am to the universal soul.
We live in one body. We have some pain, some pleasure. Just for this little
pleasure we have by living in this body, we are ready to kill everything in the
universe to preserve ourselves. If we had two bodies. would not that be much
better? So on and on to bliss. I am in everybody. Through all hands I work;
through all feet I walk. I speak through every mouth; I live in every body.

Infinite my bodies, infinite my minds. I lived in Jesus of Nazareth, in Buddha,
in Mohammed — in all the great and good of the past, of the present. I am
going to live in all that [may] come afterwards. Is that theory [No, it is the
truth.]
If you can realise this, how infinitely more pleasurable that will be. What an
ecstasy of joy! Which one body is so great that we need here anything [of] the
body. . . After living in all the bodies of others, all the bodies there are in this
world, what becomes of us? [We become one with the Infinite. And] that is the
goal. That is the only way. One [man] says, “If I know the truth, I shall be
melted away like butter.” I wish people would be, but they are too tough to be
melted so quickly!
What are we to do to be free? Free you are already. . . . How could the free
ever be bound? It is a lie. [You were] never bound. How could the unlimited
ever be limited by anything? Infinite divided by infinite, added to infinite,
multiplied by infinite [remains] infinite. You are infinite; God is infinite. You
are all infinite. There cannot be two existences, only one. The Infinite can
never be made finite. You are never bound. That is all. . . . You are free already.
You have reached the goal — all there is to reach. Never allow the mind to
think that you have not reached the goal. . . .
Whatever we [think] that we become. If you think you are poor sinners you
hypnotise yourselves: “I am a miserable, crawling worm.” Those who believe
in hell are in hell when they die; those who say that they will go to heaven [go
to heaven].
It is all play. . . . [You may say,] “We have to do something; let us do good.”
[But] who cares for good and evil? Play! God Almighty plays. That is all. . .
.You are the almighty God playing. If you want to play on the side and take the
part of a beggar, you are not [to blame someone else for making that choice].
You enjoy being the beggar. You know your real nature [to be divine]. You are
the king and play you are a beggar. . . . It is all fun. Know it and play. That is all
there is to it. Then practice it. The whole universe is a vast play. All is good
because all is fun. This star comes and crashes with our earth, and we are all
dead. [That too is fun.] You only think fun the little things that delight your
senses! . . .
[We are told that there is] one good god here, and one bad god there always
on the watch to grab me the moment I make a mistake. . . . When I was a child I
was told by someone that God watches everything. I went to bed and looked up
and expected the ceiling of the room to open. [Nothing happened.] Nobody is

watching us except ourselves. No Lord except our [own Self]; no nature but
what we feel. Habit is second nature; it is first nature also. It is all there is of
nature. I repeat [something] two or three times; it becomes my nature. Do not
be miserable! Do not repent! What is done is done. If you burn yourself, [take
the consequences].
. . . Be sensible. We make mistakes; what of that? That is all in fun. They go
so crazy over their past sins, moaning and weeping and all that. Do not repent!
After having done work, do not think of it. Go on! Stop not! Don’t look back!
What will you gain by looking back? You lose nothing, gain nothing. You are
not going to be melted like butter. Heavens and hells and incarnations — all
nonsense!
Who is born and who dies? You are having fun, playing with worlds and all
that. You keep this body as long as you like. If you do not like it, do not have it.
The Infinite is the real; the finite is the play. You are the infinite body and the
finite body in one. Know it! But knowledge will not make any difference; the
play will go on. . . . Two words — soul and body — have been joined. [Partial]
knowledge is the cause. Know that you are always free. The fire of knowledge
burns down all the [impurities and limitations]. I am that Infinite. . . .
You are as free as you were in the beginning, are now, and always will be.
He who knows that he is free is free; he who knows that he is bound is bound.
What becomes of God and worship and all that? They have their place. I
have divided myself into God and me; I become the worshipped and I worship
myself. Why not? God is I. Why not worship my Self? The universal God —
He is also my Self. It is all fun. There is no other purpose.
What is the end and aim of life? None, because I [know that I am the
Infinite]. If you are beggars, you can have aims. I have no aims, no want, no
purpose. I come to your country, and lecture — just for fun. No other meaning.
What meaning can be there? Only slaves do actions for somebody else. You do
actions for nobody else. When it suits you, you worship. You can join the
Christians, the Mohammedans, the Chinese, the Japanese. You can worship all
the gods that ever were and are ever going to be. . . .
I am in the sun, the moon, and the stars. I am with God and I am in all the
gods. I worship my Self.
There is another side to it. I have kept it in reserve. I am the man that is
going to be hanged. I am all the wicked. I am getting punished in hells. That
[also] is fun. This is the goal of philosophy [to know that I am the Infinite].
Aims, motives, purposes, and duties live in the background. . . .

This truth is first to be listened to then to be thought about. Reason, argue it
out by all manner of means. The enlightened know no more than that. Know it
for certain that you are in everything. That is why you should not hurt anybody,
because in hurting them you hurt yourself. . . . [Lastly,] this is to be meditated
upon. Think upon it. Can you realise there will come a time when everything
will crumble in the dust and you will stand alone? That moment of ecstatic joy
will never leave you. You will actually find that you are without bodies. You
never had bodies.
I am One, alone, through all eternity. Whom shall I fear? It is all my Self.
This is continuously to be meditated upon. Through that comes realisation. It is
through realisation that you become a [blessing] to others. . . .
“Thy face shines like [that of] one who has known God.” (Chhândogya. IV. ix. 2.)
That is the goal. This is not to be preached as I am doing. “Under a tree I saw a
teacher, a boy of sixteen; the disciple was an old man of eighty. The teacher
was teaching in silence, and the doubts of the disciple vanished.”
(Dakshinâmurtistotram, 12.) And who speaks? Who lights a candle to see the sun?
When the truth [dawns], no witness is necessary. You know it . . . . That is what
you are going to do: . . . realise it. [first think of it. Reason it out. Satisfy your
curiosity. Then [think] of nothing else. I wish we never read anything. Lord
help us all! Just see what [a learned] man becomes.
“This is said, and that is said. . . .”
“What do you say, my friend?”
“I say nothing.” [He quotes] everybody else’s thought; but he thinks nothing.
If this is education, what is lunacy? Look at all the men who wrote! . . . These
modern writers, not two sentences their own! All quotations. . . .
There is not much value in books, and in [secondhand] religion there is no
value whatsoever. It is like eating. Your religion would not satisfy me Jesus
saw God and Buddha saw God. If you have not seen God, you are no better
than the atheist. Only he is quiet, and you talk much and disturb the world with
your talk. Books and bibles and scriptures are of no use. I met an old man when
I was a boy; [he did not study any scripture, but he transmitted the truth of God
by a touch].
Silence ye teachers of the world. Silence ye books. Lord, Thou alone speak
and Thy servant listeneth. . . . If truth is not there, what is the use of this life? We
all think we will catch it, but we do not. Most of us catch only dust. God is not
there. If no God, what is the use of life? Is there any resting-place in the
universe? [It is up to us to find it]; only we do not [search for it intensely. We

are] like a little piece of maw carried on in the current.
If there is this truth, if there is God, it must be within us. . . . [I must be able to
say,] “I have seen Him with my eyes,” Otherwise I have no religion. Beliefs,
doctrines, sermons do not make religion. It is realisation, perception of God
[which alone is religion]. What is the glory of all these men whom the world
worships? God was no more a doctrine [for them. Did they believe] because
their grandfather believed it? No. It was the realisation of the Infinite, higher
than their own bodies, minds, and everything. This world is real inasmuch as it
contains a little bit [of] the reflection of that God. We love the good man
because in his face shines the reflection a little more. We must catch it
ourselves. There is no other way.
That is the goal. Struggle for it! Have your own Bible. Have your own
Christ. Otherwise you are not religious. Do not talk religion. Men talk and talk.
“Some of them, steeped in darkness, in the pride of their hearts think that they
have the light. And not only [that], they offer to take others upon their
shoulders and both fall into the pit.” (Katha, I. ii. 5.) . . .
No church ever saved by itself. It is good to be born in a temple, but woe
unto the person who dies in a temple or church. Out of it! . . . It was a good
beginning, but leave it! It was the childhood place . . . but let it be! . . . Go to
God directly. No theories, no doctrines. Then alone will all doubts vanish.
Then alone will all crookedness be made straight. . . .
In the midst of the manifold, he who sees that One; in the midst of this
infinite death, he who sees that one life; in the midst of the manifold, he who
sees that which never changes in his own soul — unto him belongs eternal
peace.

