Welcome to Kangra Fort, I am Tikaraj Aishwarya Katoch. As we walk towards the entrance, let me explain that more than 3,500 years ago, my ancestor Maharaja Susharma Chandra built this fort to protect his kingdom. It is the oldest fort in the Himalayas and it may be the oldest fort in all of India. It took an earthquake which killed thousands in 1905 to break down its thick walls. But what remains still tells an incredible story. As you follow in the footsteps of my forefathers and mothers, imagine what this place was like in its prime, guarded by warriors, who one opponent described as, strongest buffaloes with necks like rhinoceros. Before you get going, please take a look at your map. Those red numbers are the highlights of our fort, the things you really don't want to miss even if you are on a tight schedule today. Something special you have to look forward to is a couple of minutes from our neighbor the Dalai Lama, who lives just up the road in Dharamshala. In just a moment, I'll hand you over to Roshan Seth, who will guide you on your journey back in time. I'll be back later, but for now, here's a final tip as you head to stop 2, the Ranjit Singh Gate, straight ahead. It's what my grandfather taught me on my first visit to the fort. You must pass through the gates leg first, never lead with your head, because if there is an enemy on the other side, you might lose your head. We are so pleased you are here. Enjoy your time in Kangra.

This gate was built in 1809 to commemorate the successful capture of Kangra Fort. Mind you, that didn't happen very often. From 720 to 963 AD, for almost 250 years, this fort was besieged no less than 52 times by the most powerful kings and rulers, but no one could hold it. You couldn't just stroll into the fort back then. There was a drawbridge leading to this entrance, and as you start to glance around now, look at the second gateway to its right. You'll see the strategically placed gun slits in the wall. When you're ready, remember Tikaraj Aishwarya's advice, and leg first then, through the Ranjitsingh gate we go. Notice how that second doorway is placed off on an angle? No gate was ever built directly opposite the preceding one. That was to prevent an enemy from building up enough momentum to just charge right through. If you did manage to break in, and pause in this little courtyard, archers would bombard you from above before you could get any further. As we continue walking now, let me tell you about the first enemy who ever made it past this impressive security system, Mahmud of Ghazni. Attracted by stories of the precious stones and gold stored here at the fort, the sultan and his troops made a sneak attack when the king was away at battle in 1009 AD. They forced the guards to reveal the location of the legendary treasure wells, and after killing them, they got away with such a bounty, one witness remembered, the backs of camels could not carry it, or vessels contain it, nor the imaginations of arithmaticians conceive it. The gate we just passed through was built 800 years later, by the great Sikh Maharaja Ranjit Singh, known as the Lion of Punjab. He won the fort in exchange for saving the lives of Maharaja Sansarjan and his family. They had been trapped here, in the palace on top of the fort, for four years. Before we move on, please take out your map. You'll notice that there are pictures of each stop that will act as visual cues for you. On your way to our next stop, number three, at the bottom of the steps, you see the tiny niche. It's on the right, at ground level. Carved into the stone there, you'll find an ancient fertility symbol, known as a Shiva Ling. It's the mark of Lord Shiva, one of the primary Hindu gods, known as the Destroyer. Take a look, then join me at the top of the steps, at stop three, the Ahini Gate.

Well, I tell you about this gate, known as the Ahini Darwaza. Ahini means metal, and an iron gate once stood here that was two stories high and covered with spikes. That was just the kind of challenge Alexander the Great relished. Ptolemy, the geographer who accompanied Alexander on his expedition to India, described a ferocious battle in 326 BC with a mountain king called Porus, whose Indian name was Raja Paramanandachandra. It was the monsoon season. The ground was wet and slippery. The Abyas was overflowing. Porus lost a son who fought with valour. Opinion varies about who actually won. Greek scholars say it was Alexander. Indian historians insist it was Porus. Well, what is certain is that both armies lost many lives. As part of the peace treaty, Alexander headed home to Greece with one of Porus' daughters. He died en route, and Porus retained control of Kangra fort. Porus is believed to be a direct ancestor of Tikaraj Aishwarya Katoch. As he will tell you, holding on to this fort over the centuries was a full-time job for his family. Anyone who ruled Delhi sent an army down to invade us. From the British, counting backwards, the Duranis, Abdalis, Feroz Shah Tughlaq, the Suris, the Mughals, neighbouring Rajput rulers, we fought Kanoj, we fought the Paharis, Alexander the Great, Ashoka the Great. So we've been in battle constantly. I think if you took an average, every four years an ancestor of mine was at war. I'll see you next at stop four, at the top of the steps to the left. It's just before the Amiri gate, the gate of nobles. Thank you.

Let me introduce you to the guardians at the archway here. Looking down from the top is Hanuman, the monkey god, a Hindu symbol of physical strength and devotion. Below him, to the left, holding the axe, is elephant-headed Lord Ganesha, remover of obstacles. And that's Ambika on the right. She's a personification of female energy, worshipped by the Katoch family since ancient times. The Katoches are devout Hindus and still worship Ambika at the oldest known temple devoted to her in all of India. That's right here at Kangra Fort, and we'll see it later. Last but not least, in the centre of the archway, do you see the deer wearing a scarf? That's an ancient crest of the Katoch clan. The origin of the family predates recorded history, but it is known that there were more than 200 Katoch kings before Maharaja Susharmachand, the man credited with building this fort. If you'd like to hear Tikaraj tell a memorable tale about the creation of the Katoch dynasty, press 401. Whenever you're ready, I'll meet you at the next gate.

about Jahangiri Gate, named in honor of the Mughal Emperor who ruled India in the early 1600s. The Mughal Empire was founded by warriors who came to India from Afghanistan. It reached its peak under Jahangiri's father, Akbar, and also included the reign of Jahangiri's son, Shah Jahan, who built the Taj Mahal. The Mughals had lusted after this fort for many years. This is from Jahangiri's diary. From the time when the voice of Islam reached Hindustan, not one of the sultans of lofty dignity has obtained victory over it. Then, in 1620, after a bloody siege that lasted for 14 months, Jahangiri's army finally won. 12,000 Khatot soldiers died defending their land and their king. After hearing of the surrender, Jahangiri wrote, The joy-enhancing news of the conquest of the Kangra fort reached our mind. In thankfulness for this great boon and important victory, I bowed my head with humility at the throne of the merciful creature and beat with loud sounds the drums of gladness and pleasure. To commemorate the happy occasion, Jahangiri built this gate and erected a large mosque on the grounds. He was in such a good mood that he pardoned Maharaja Hari Chand Katoch. A few years later, when Hari started conducting guerrilla warfare against the Mughals, he was caught and flayed alive on the walls of the fort. In case you don't know, that means his skin was removed. In this case, while he was still alive. His descendant, Maharaja Kaman Chand, got vengeance more than a century later, when he captured and flayed an entire Mughal contingent. These fierce warriors did not forgive and forget. In time, Maharaja Kaman Chand managed to take back all the territory Jahangiri had occupied, except this fort. It remained in enemy hands for a century and a half, until Maharaja Kaman's grandson, the boy Maharaja Sansar Chand, finally won it back in 1787. THE GATE Let's continue now, just through the gate. Find a safe perch on the right to survey the view, and I'll give you the lay of the land. To be continued ...


Kangraf Fort was strategically placed, as one observer noted, like the pupil of an eye at the spot where two rivers met. If you look below, you'll see the walkway we came in on. This rampart overlooking the entry would have held the biggest cannon. In the late 1700s, Maharaja Sansarchand Kutoch ran a foundry here that created daggers and swords and later guns and cannons, both for his own troops and for the British Raj. The fortified building you see off to the far left is the museum named in Maharaja Sansarchand's honour. It's definitely worth a visit. Researchers revealed that there was a series of about 300 forts in this area, all arranged in a circular fashion around this one, the ultimate citadel at the nucleus. If one circle was violated, the soldiers who survived would race to warn and join the guards at the next. We've reached stop 7, continue along the path and up the stairs now.


Kangra Fort was strategically placed, as one observer noted, like the pupil of an eye at the spot where two rivers met. If you look below, you'll see the walkway we came in on. This rampart overlooking the entry would have held the biggest cannon. In the late 1700s, Maharaja Sansarchand Katoch ran a foundry here that created daggers and swords and later guns and cannons both for his own troops and for the British Raj. The fortified building you see off to the far left is the museum named in Maharaja Sansarchand's honour. It's definitely worth a visit. Researchers revealed that there was a series of about 300 forts in this area, all arranged in a circular fashion around this one, the ultimate citadel at the nucleus. If one circle was violated, the soldiers who survived would race to warn and join the guards at the next. To reach stop 7, continue along the path and up the stairs now.


The sweeping view here from the bench gives you an idea of how unapproachable the fort must have seemed to intruders. Believe it or not, the hillsides across the way to the left were not worn away by weather. Men were strapped to ropes and lowered down the cliff to chisel them smooth by hand. Any vegetation that might provide a hiding place was stripped away. The gateway behind us is the oldest surviving part of the fort. Let's walk towards it now. The weathered idols on either side of Darshani Gate have been welcoming travellers to the temples within for about 2,000 years. Ganga on the right symbolises the Ganges River. Yamuna, on the left, represents another holy river that originates in the Himalaya and merges with the Ganges. Please step inside the first courtyard and join me on the bench under the big tree. If only this tree could talk, imagine the stories it would tell. It's been growing here for the past three to four hundred years, maybe more. It may have been just a seedling when baby elephants carried the intricately carved pillars up here for the temple that once dominated this courtyard. It was destroyed by an earthquake in 1905. The round disk-like stones in the ruins to the left are the remains of the shikhar, the top of the temple tower. And over to the right, you can still make out the tiny rooms that served as living quarters for the priests. Before we look at the Hindu and Jain shrines, which were miraculously spared, let's shift to the present for just a moment. Today, the best-known resident in this area is the Dalai Lama. In 1959, when he fled Tibet, Prime Minister Nehru offered the spiritual leader and his followers refuge just up the road in Dharamsala. The Dalai Lama has lived there ever since, and seekers come from all over the world to see him and to study Buddhism. I'm not a historian. Of course, I sort of have the view, as far as philosophical thinking is concerned, I think this country, India, much developed. Of course, Buddhism comes from India, so many different traditions, Hindu philosophy, Jain philosophy, Buddhist philosophy, very much spirit of non-sectarian, isn't it? This country, I think, because of the open-minded, eventually religious tradition, from outside India, Christianity, and then Islam, Judaism, all found happy place here. So therefore, tourists who come from different background, Judo-Christian background, or Muslim country, or other, even non-believer, okay, I think it is quite useful, or worthwhile, to learn India's thousand-year-old tradition of religious harmony on the basis of mutual respect. This human body come from a parent, parent come from grandparent. Without these previous generations, we will not exist here. So that's connection, past and present. Past not in our hand, but future in our hand. So in order to make proper preparation for better future, we can learn many things from past. That's my view. Thank you.


You should now be in front of the oldest temple in India dedicated to the Hindu goddess Ambika. The trough just outside was where the faithful washed their feet before going in. While you remove your shoes, let me tell you a little bit about Ambika. She is an embodiment of the goddess Durga and is worshipped in many other forms. As Parvati, she becomes the divine spouse of Lord Shiva. As Kali, she becomes a terrifying and angry goddess who slays demons. The Katoch kings prayed to Ambika Mata, which means mother goddess in ancient times, and the Katoch clan still gathers here at least once a year for a Havan. That's a ritual prayer performed with a fire. The ceremony takes place just outside the temple, here in the courtyard, and the whole town of Kangra is invited to participate. Our next stop is in the temple. As you enter now, please be respectful of anyone who may be worshipping there. Thank you for watching.


This temple has long shared its tiny space with the Jain community and you can see one of the religion's holiest relics just to the right behind the grill. The statue here is believed to portray Lord Mahavira and every year thousands of devotees come here from around the world to be in its presence. Mahavira was a contemporary of the Buddha. He is the 24th and the last Tirthankara of the Jain religion. A Tirthankara is a liberated soul who has conquered the dualities of love and hate, pain and pleasure. What makes this statue extremely special is that it's said to have been sculpted during Mahavira's lifetime and that he personally performed its Prana Pratishtha ceremony when life is introduced into an idol making it an embodiment of God. Tikaraj explains how this statue came to be here. One of Mahavira's sisters was married to one of my ancestors and at that time the Afghan invasions were pretty prevalent in Rajasthan where the Jains were centred. So they wanted to find a safe place and no place seemed safer than the place where Mahavira's sister had been married. And so the Jains brought their main idols of their faith here to Kangra Fort and hid them here. We don't know where they all are, buried by the earthquake perhaps, but this spot has become a pilgrimage for Jains the world over. The Vajreswari Mai Temple and Jain residence for travellers is right next door to the fort. You may want to stop in and take a look when you head back down to the real world. Once you've got your shoes back on, please walk behind the temple where you'll find a courtyard in ruins.


As you walk around these grounds, keep an eye out for anything glittering in the sun. There were reportedly 21 treasure wells here at the fort. Remember the very beginning of the tour? I told you about Mahmud of Ghazni and how he made off with so much treasure, his camels couldn't carry it all home. Mahmud's personal historian, Utibi, witnessed the plundering of the fort in 1009 AD and wrote that they were lured here by stories of a greater quantity of gold and silver bars and coins and precious stones than was ever collected in the royal treasury of any prince on earth. Where did the Katoch kings get all this treasure? And why was it stored in wells? As you continue to explore here, Tikaraj will explain. Our temples here were very famous and a lot of nobles and businessmen in those days would come here and give offerings to the temples. Our armies were paid the salary by the earnings of the temple, so we were considered as protectors of the faith, because we were protecting the faith and the temples, and our armies were religious armies. And their salaries were paid from all this donation of the devotees. Now there was so much of it that it had to be stored somewhere. There were no banks and there were no vaults to hide them in, so the most logical was to hide all the precious metal, because that does not get spoiled by rain or water or termite or whatever nature has to throw at it. So there were these wells that dug out into the basements and the foundations of the fort and they were stored there for a rainy day whenever they were required to be taken out and the army needed to be expanded or the army needed to be paid, and they just kept getting stored and stored and stored. That is until Mahmud of Ghazni came along. He stole all he could. And to add insult to injury, he bragged that he'd melted down the gold umbrella that had protected the statue of Ambika and turned it into a bathtub for himself. To help console the Maharaja, the people of Kangra decided to present the Maharani with a very special gift. Once again, Tikaraj explains. And there were 900,000 households in the entire region of Kangra and each of them donated one rupee and it was collected and a necklace of diamonds was made. And when we fought the British 850 years later, we lost the battle. And in order to make a treaty with the British so that we would have some semblance of a state still with us to govern, we gave that necklace, which is in the Tower of London now. And in return we were given more fiefdom, which is a partial corner or a small corner of the original state. And that's called Lumbagaon. That's why we are called the Maharajas of Kangra and Lumbagaon. The small property of Lumbagaon remains in the Katoch family today. As for the priceless necklace, it remains in England. Return to the courtyard we came from now and head up to the next level. I'll meet you at the top of the staircase.


You're looking down at the hand-carved back wall of the Lakshmi Narayan temple. This side is so impressive, it's hard to even imagine what the front must have looked like. It's said that artisans worked for ten years to engrave this stunning facade from top to bottom, all gone in just a few minutes in the 1905 earthquake. The temple was named in honour of Narayan, an incarnation of Lord Vishnu, master of the universe, and his consort Lakshmi, the goddess of love, beauty and prosperity. Popular belief in religious circles is that the fort was destroyed because the Maharajas dared to build their palace above the temple. The gods considered this sacrilege and vented their rage accordingly. You can still marvel at the ingenuity of the interlocking stone slab system used to build the temple roof. Channels were carved so that the adjoining piece just slipped in. This is the first example of this construction technique known in India. When you are ready, proceed up the stairs to the uppermost courtyard at the top of the fort.


You've come a long way and have finally reached the inner sanctum. This is where the Katoch royal family lived, in buildings situated on all four sides of this courtyard. Originally there were eleven gates and twenty-three bastions to cross before you reach Shishmahal, the Palace of Mirrors, which was located on one of the seven floors that once towered above this level. Imagine Maharaja Sansarchand and his family hiding up here for four years as his enemies tried to break in down below. Have a seat on one of the benches, or feel free to walk over to the window on the left and look out onto the Kangra valley, while I tell you what happened to Maharaja Sansarchand, not the last Katoch Maharaja, but the last one to occupy this fort. Please take care to stay well back as you admire the view. By the time he was thirteen years old in 1787, the Maharaja had bested the Mughals and the Sikhs and retaken control of Kangra Fort. For the next twenty years, he ruled during a period that's gone down in history as the Golden Age of Kangra. He expanded the kingdom to an estimated 32,000 square kilometres and turned this region into a great centre of the arts. Maharaja Sansarchand was also a legendary builder. He created a palace with stunning gardens at Sujanpur, not far from here. There was a glorious reception hall there with 22 gates, one for each of the neighbouring Maharajas whom Maharaja Sansarchand had conquered. Once a year, they were required to swallow their pride and emerge from their assigned gate to pay tribute to their lord and master. If only the Maharaja had been content with all that he had! But in 1803, he set his sights on the kingdom Bilaspur. The Raja there called in the Gorkhas, the warriors of the Nepali kings, and the 22 neighbours Maharaja Sansarchand humiliated were all too glad to contribute to the Katoch king's downfall. Finally, with the fort surrounded and his soldiers boiling tree bark for soup, the Maharaja sent an SOS to his old adversary, Ranjit Singh. In return for saving their lives, the great Sikh leader got this fort and 66 Katoch villages. Maharaja Sansarchand retired to Amtar Palace in Nadal with his favourite dancing girl, Jamalo. He died in 1823, leaving little more than the glorious Katoch name and the small property of Lumbragao to his heirs. Follow the map to the terrace past the ruined column for the last stop on our narrowcaster's tour.


This terrace was once the fort's watchtower. Look out onto the Kangra valley with the river Banganga flowing below. It feels like you're on top of the world. The wall surrounding the fort extended all the way to the lush forested area you see ahead. Under that blanket of green, archaeologists have discovered more ruins that they think were prison cells. They believe the flat area, the meadow off to the right, was utilised for mock battles, as if the Katoch army didn't get enough practice already. If you turn around now, you may be lucky enough to experience one of those rare, perfectly clear days when you can see the entire Dholadhar mountain range. The locals call this region Devabhumi, the valley of the gods. And now that we've shared the view from the top, you can truly grasp the saying that came to be associated with this place, he who holds the fort, rules the hills. As we begin making our way back down to the main entrance, I'll complete the saga of this incredible family which built and controlled Kangra Fort for so many centuries. Almost twenty years after the earthquake, the British crown recognised Jai Chandra Katoch as the Maharaja of Lambragaon, Kangra, and returned this ancestral site to him. Even though the fort lay in ruins, it was a moment that meant a great deal to the clan. Maharaja Jai Chandra's son, Dhruvdev Chandra Katoch, was the last Maharaja with ruling powers here in Kangra. In 1947, when India won its independence from Britain, he merged his kingdom with the new nation. Twenty-five years later, the princely order was abolished. They may be Maharajas only in name now, but the Katoch's still called Kangra home. They've taken their place in India's democracy, battling to improve schooling and basic services for the people here, as well as managing hotels and jewellery and financial businesses. History has taught them that you can't bank on treasure wells. If you'd like to see and learn more about the Katoch family and the history of this region, the Maharaja Sansarjan Museum is right next door. Don't miss the view from the rooftop over there. You can gaze back at Kangra Fort and contemplate all the things that went on here long years ago. For now, I'll say goodbye. Please return your player on the way out. From all of us in Kangra, thank you for visiting today.